The Project Gutenberg EBook of Grimms’ Fairy Tales, by The Brothers Grimm

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Grimms’ Fairy Tales

Author: The Brothers Grimm

Translator: Edgar Taylor and Marian Edwardes

Posting Date: December 14, 2008 [EBook #2591]
Release Date: April, 2001
Last Updated: November 7, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRIMMS’ FAIRY TALES ***




Produced by Emma Dudding, John Bickers, and Dagny





FAIRY TALES

By The Brothers Grimm



PREPARER’S NOTE

     The text is based on translations from
     the Grimms’ Kinder und Hausmarchen by
     Edgar Taylor and Marian Edwardes.




CONTENTS:

     THE GOLDEN BIRD
     HANS IN LUCK
     JORINDA AND JORINDEL
     THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS
     OLD SULTAN
     THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN
     BRIAR ROSE
     THE DOG AND THE SPARROW
     THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES
     THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE
     THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR
     THE FROG-PRINCE
     CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP
     THE GOOSE-GIRL
     THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET
       1. HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS
       2. HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES
     RAPUNZEL
     FUNDEVOGEL
     THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR
     HANSEL AND GRETEL
     THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE
     MOTHER HOLLE
     LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]
     THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM
     TOM THUMB
     RUMPELSTILTSKIN
     CLEVER GRETEL
     THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON
     THE LITTLE PEASANT
     FREDERICK AND CATHERINE
     SWEETHEART ROLAND
     SNOWDROP
     THE PINK
     CLEVER ELSIE
     THE MISER IN THE BUSH
     ASHPUTTEL
     THE WHITE SNAKE
     THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS
     THE QUEEN BEE
     THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER
     THE JUNIPER-TREE
     the juniper-tree.
     THE TURNIP
     CLEVER HANS
     THE THREE LANGUAGES
     THE FOX AND THE CAT
     THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS
     LILY AND THE LION
     THE FOX AND THE HORSE
     THE BLUE LIGHT
     THE RAVEN
     THE GOLDEN GOOSE
     THE WATER OF LIFE
     THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN
     THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN
     DOCTOR KNOWALL
     THE SEVEN RAVENS
     THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX
     FIRST STORY
     SECOND STORY
     THE SALAD
     THE STORY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FORTH TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS
     KING GRISLY-BEARD
     IRON HANS
     CAT-SKIN
     SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED




THE BROTHERS GRIMM FAIRY TALES




THE GOLDEN BIRD

A certain king had a beautiful garden, and in the garden stood a tree
which bore golden apples. These apples were always counted, and about
the time when they began to grow ripe it was found that every night one
of them was gone. The king became very angry at this, and ordered the
gardener to keep watch all night under the tree. The gardener set his
eldest son to watch; but about twelve o’clock he fell asleep, and in
the morning another of the apples was missing. Then the second son was
ordered to watch; and at midnight he too fell asleep, and in the morning
another apple was gone. Then the third son offered to keep watch; but
the gardener at first would not let him, for fear some harm should come
to him: however, at last he consented, and the young man laid himself
under the tree to watch. As the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling
noise in the air, and a bird came flying that was of pure gold; and as
it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak, the gardener’s son
jumped up and shot an arrow at it. But the arrow did the bird no harm;
only it dropped a golden feather from its tail, and then flew away.
The golden feather was brought to the king in the morning, and all the
council was called together. Everyone agreed that it was worth more than
all the wealth of the kingdom: but the king said, ‘One feather is of no
use to me, I must have the whole bird.’

Then the gardener’s eldest son set out and thought to find the golden
bird very easily; and when he had gone but a little way, he came to a
wood, and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting; so he took his
bow and made ready to shoot at it. Then the fox said, ‘Do not shoot me,
for I will give you good counsel; I know what your business is, and
that you want to find the golden bird. You will reach a village in the
evening; and when you get there, you will see two inns opposite to each
other, one of which is very pleasant and beautiful to look at: go not in
there, but rest for the night in the other, though it may appear to you
to be very poor and mean.’ But the son thought to himself, ‘What can
such a beast as this know about the matter?’ So he shot his arrow at
the fox; but he missed it, and it set up its tail above its back and
ran into the wood. Then he went his way, and in the evening came to
the village where the two inns were; and in one of these were people
singing, and dancing, and feasting; but the other looked very dirty,
and poor. ‘I should be very silly,’ said he, ‘if I went to that shabby
house, and left this charming place’; so he went into the smart house,
and ate and drank at his ease, and forgot the bird, and his country too.

Time passed on; and as the eldest son did not come back, and no tidings
were heard of him, the second son set out, and the same thing happened
to him. He met the fox, who gave him the good advice: but when he came
to the two inns, his eldest brother was standing at the window where
the merrymaking was, and called to him to come in; and he could not
withstand the temptation, but went in, and forgot the golden bird and
his country in the same manner.

Time passed on again, and the youngest son too wished to set out into
the wide world to seek for the golden bird; but his father would not
listen to it for a long while, for he was very fond of his son, and
was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also, and prevent his
coming back. However, at last it was agreed he should go, for he would
not rest at home; and as he came to the wood, he met the fox, and heard
the same good counsel. But he was thankful to the fox, and did not
attempt his life as his brothers had done; so the fox said, ‘Sit upon my
tail, and you will travel faster.’ So he sat down, and the fox began to
run, and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair
whistled in the wind.

When they came to the village, the son followed the fox’s counsel, and
without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all
night at his ease. In the morning came the fox again and met him as he
was beginning his journey, and said, ‘Go straight forward, till you come
to a castle, before which lie a whole troop of soldiers fast asleep and
snoring: take no notice of them, but go into the castle and pass on and
on till you come to a room, where the golden bird sits in a wooden cage;
close by it stands a beautiful golden cage; but do not try to take the
bird out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome one, otherwise
you will repent it.’ Then the fox stretched out his tail again, and the
young man sat himself down, and away they went over stock and stone till
their hair whistled in the wind.

Before the castle gate all was as the fox had said: so the son went in
and found the chamber where the golden bird hung in a wooden cage, and
below stood the golden cage, and the three golden apples that had been
lost were lying close by it. Then thought he to himself, ‘It will be a
very droll thing to bring away such a fine bird in this shabby cage’; so
he opened the door and took hold of it and put it into the golden cage.
But the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke, and
they took him prisoner and carried him before the king. The next morning
the court sat to judge him; and when all was heard, it sentenced him to
die, unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as
swiftly as the wind; and if he did this, he was to have the golden bird
given him for his own.

So he set out once more on his journey, sighing, and in great despair,
when on a sudden his friend the fox met him, and said, ‘You see now
what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel. I will
still, however, tell you how to find the golden horse, if you will do as
I bid you. You must go straight on till you come to the castle where the
horse stands in his stall: by his side will lie the groom fast asleep
and snoring: take away the horse quietly, but be sure to put the old
leathern saddle upon him, and not the golden one that is close by it.’
Then the son sat down on the fox’s tail, and away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled in the wind.

All went right, and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden
saddle. But when the son looked at the horse, he thought it a great pity
to put the leathern saddle upon it. ‘I will give him the good one,’
said he; ‘I am sure he deserves it.’ As he took up the golden saddle the
groom awoke and cried out so loud, that all the guards ran in and took
him prisoner, and in the morning he was again brought before the court
to be judged, and was sentenced to die. But it was agreed, that, if he
could bring thither the beautiful princess, he should live, and have the
bird and the horse given him for his own.

Then he went his way very sorrowful; but the old fox came and said, ‘Why
did not you listen to me? If you had, you would have carried away
both the bird and the horse; yet will I once more give you counsel. Go
straight on, and in the evening you will arrive at a castle. At twelve
o’clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house: go up to her
and give her a kiss, and she will let you lead her away; but take care
you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother.’
Then the fox stretched out his tail, and so away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled again.

As they came to the castle, all was as the fox had said, and at twelve
o’clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the
kiss, and she agreed to run away with him, but begged with many tears
that he would let her take leave of her father. At first he refused,
but she wept still more and more, and fell at his feet, till at last
he consented; but the moment she came to her father’s house the guards
awoke and he was taken prisoner again.

Then he was brought before the king, and the king said, ‘You shall never
have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops
the view from my window.’ Now this hill was so big that the whole world
could not take it away: and when he had worked for seven days, and had
done very little, the fox came and said. ‘Lie down and go to sleep; I
will work for you.’ And in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone;
so he went merrily to the king, and told him that now that it was
removed he must give him the princess.

Then the king was obliged to keep his word, and away went the young man
and the princess; and the fox came and said to him, ‘We will have all
three, the princess, the horse, and the bird.’ ‘Ah!’ said the young man,
‘that would be a great thing, but how can you contrive it?’

‘If you will only listen,’ said the fox, ‘it can be done. When you come
to the king, and he asks for the beautiful princess, you must say, “Here
she is!” Then he will be very joyful; and you will mount the golden
horse that they are to give you, and put out your hand to take leave of
them; but shake hands with the princess last. Then lift her quickly on
to the horse behind you; clap your spurs to his side, and gallop away as
fast as you can.’

All went right: then the fox said, ‘When you come to the castle where
the bird is, I will stay with the princess at the door, and you will
ride in and speak to the king; and when he sees that it is the right
horse, he will bring out the bird; but you must sit still, and say that
you want to look at it, to see whether it is the true golden bird; and
when you get it into your hand, ride away.’

This, too, happened as the fox said; they carried off the bird, the
princess mounted again, and they rode on to a great wood. Then the fox
came, and said, ‘Pray kill me, and cut off my head and my feet.’ But the
young man refused to do it: so the fox said, ‘I will at any rate give
you good counsel: beware of two things; ransom no one from the gallows,
and sit down by the side of no river.’ Then away he went. ‘Well,’
thought the young man, ‘it is no hard matter to keep that advice.’

He rode on with the princess, till at last he came to the village where
he had left his two brothers. And there he heard a great noise and
uproar; and when he asked what was the matter, the people said, ‘Two men
are going to be hanged.’ As he came nearer, he saw that the two men were
his brothers, who had turned robbers; so he said, ‘Cannot they in any
way be saved?’ But the people said ‘No,’ unless he would bestow all his
money upon the rascals and buy their liberty. Then he did not stay to
think about the matter, but paid what was asked, and his brothers were
given up, and went on with him towards their home.

And as they came to the wood where the fox first met them, it was so
cool and pleasant that the two brothers said, ‘Let us sit down by the
side of the river, and rest a while, to eat and drink.’ So he said,
‘Yes,’ and forgot the fox’s counsel, and sat down on the side of the
river; and while he suspected nothing, they came behind, and threw him
down the bank, and took the princess, the horse, and the bird, and went
home to the king their master, and said. ‘All this have we won by our
labour.’ Then there was great rejoicing made; but the horse would not
eat, the bird would not sing, and the princess wept.

The youngest son fell to the bottom of the river’s bed: luckily it was
nearly dry, but his bones were almost broken, and the bank was so steep
that he could find no way to get out. Then the old fox came once more,
and scolded him for not following his advice; otherwise no evil would
have befallen him: ‘Yet,’ said he, ‘I cannot leave you here, so lay hold
of my tail and hold fast.’ Then he pulled him out of the river, and said
to him, as he got upon the bank, ‘Your brothers have set watch to kill
you, if they find you in the kingdom.’ So he dressed himself as a poor
man, and came secretly to the king’s court, and was scarcely within the
doors when the horse began to eat, and the bird to sing, and the princess
left off weeping. Then he went to the king, and told him all his
brothers’ roguery; and they were seized and punished, and he had the
princess given to him again; and after the king’s death he was heir to
his kingdom.

A long while after, he went to walk one day in the wood, and the old fox
met him, and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him, and cut
off his head and feet. And at last he did so, and in a moment the
fox was changed into a man, and turned out to be the brother of the
princess, who had been lost a great many many years.




HANS IN LUCK

Some men are born to good luck: all they do or try to do comes
right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are
swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will, they
will always, like poor puss, alight upon their legs, and only move on so
much the faster. The world may very likely not always think of them as
they think of themselves, but what care they for the world? what can it
know about the matter?

One of these lucky beings was neighbour Hans. Seven long years he had
worked hard for his master. At last he said, ‘Master, my time is up; I
must go home and see my poor mother once more: so pray pay me my wages
and let me go.’ And the master said, ‘You have been a faithful and good
servant, Hans, so your pay shall be handsome.’ Then he gave him a lump
of silver as big as his head.

Hans took out his pocket-handkerchief, put the piece of silver into it,
threw it over his shoulder, and jogged off on his road homewards. As he
went lazily on, dragging one foot after another, a man came in sight,
trotting gaily along on a capital horse. ‘Ah!’ said Hans aloud, ‘what a
fine thing it is to ride on horseback! There he sits as easy and happy
as if he was at home, in the chair by his fireside; he trips against no
stones, saves shoe-leather, and gets on he hardly knows how.’ Hans did
not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all, and said, ‘Well,
friend, why do you go on foot then?’ ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘I have this load to
carry: to be sure it is silver, but it is so heavy that I can’t hold up
my head, and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly.’ ‘What do you say
of making an exchange?’ said the horseman. ‘I will give you my horse,
and you shall give me the silver; which will save you a great deal of
trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said Hans: ‘but as you are so kind to me, I must tell you one
thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you.’
However, the horseman got off, took the silver, helped Hans up, gave him
the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other, and said, ‘When
you want to go very fast, smack your lips loudly together, and cry
“Jip!”’

Hans was delighted as he sat on the horse, drew himself up, squared his
elbows, turned out his toes, cracked his whip, and rode merrily off, one
minute whistling a merry tune, and another singing,

 ‘No care and no sorrow,
  A fig for the morrow!
  We’ll laugh and be merry,
  Sing neigh down derry!’

After a time he thought he should like to go a little faster, so he
smacked his lips and cried ‘Jip!’ Away went the horse full gallop; and
before Hans knew what he was about, he was thrown off, and lay on his
back by the road-side. His horse would have ran off, if a shepherd who
was coming by, driving a cow, had not stopped it. Hans soon came to
himself, and got upon his legs again, sadly vexed, and said to the
shepherd, ‘This riding is no joke, when a man has the luck to get upon
a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break
his neck. However, I’m off now once for all: I like your cow now a great
deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick, and has
spoiled my best coat, you see, in this puddle; which, by the by, smells
not very like a nosegay. One can walk along at one’s leisure behind that
cow--keep good company, and have milk, butter, and cheese, every day,
into the bargain. What would I give to have such a prize!’ ‘Well,’ said
the shepherd, ‘if you are so fond of her, I will change my cow for your
horse; I like to do good to my neighbours, even though I lose by it
myself.’ ‘Done!’ said Hans, merrily. ‘What a noble heart that good man
has!’ thought he. Then the shepherd jumped upon the horse, wished Hans
and the cow good morning, and away he rode.

Hans brushed his coat, wiped his face and hands, rested a while, and
then drove off his cow quietly, and thought his bargain a very lucky
one. ‘If I have only a piece of bread (and I certainly shall always be
able to get that), I can, whenever I like, eat my butter and cheese with
it; and when I am thirsty I can milk my cow and drink the milk: and what
can I wish for more?’ When he came to an inn, he halted, ate up all his
bread, and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer. When he had
rested himself he set off again, driving his cow towards his mother’s
village. But the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on, till at
last, as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than
an hour to cross, he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue
clave to the roof of his mouth. ‘I can find a cure for this,’ thought
he; ‘now I will milk my cow and quench my thirst’: so he tied her to the
stump of a tree, and held his leathern cap to milk into; but not a drop
was to be had. Who would have thought that this cow, which was to bring
him milk and butter and cheese, was all that time utterly dry? Hans had
not thought of looking to that.

While he was trying his luck in milking, and managing the matter very
clumsily, the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome; and at
last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down; and there he
lay a long while senseless. Luckily a butcher soon came by, driving a
pig in a wheelbarrow. ‘What is the matter with you, my man?’ said the
butcher, as he helped him up. Hans told him what had happened, how he
was dry, and wanted to milk his cow, but found the cow was dry too. Then
the butcher gave him a flask of ale, saying, ‘There, drink and refresh
yourself; your cow will give you no milk: don’t you see she is an old
beast, good for nothing but the slaughter-house?’ ‘Alas, alas!’ said
Hans, ‘who would have thought it? What a shame to take my horse, and
give me only a dry cow! If I kill her, what will she be good for? I hate
cow-beef; it is not tender enough for me. If it were a pig now--like
that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do
something with it; it would at any rate make sausages.’ ‘Well,’ said
the butcher, ‘I don’t like to say no, when one is asked to do a kind,
neighbourly thing. To please you I will change, and give you my fine fat
pig for the cow.’ ‘Heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial!’
said Hans, as he gave the butcher the cow; and taking the pig off the
wheel-barrow, drove it away, holding it by the string that was tied to
its leg.

So on he jogged, and all seemed now to go right with him: he had met
with some misfortunes, to be sure; but he was now well repaid for all.
How could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at
last got?

The next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose. The
countryman stopped to ask what was o’clock; this led to further chat;
and Hans told him all his luck, how he had so many good bargains, and
how all the world went gay and smiling with him. The countryman then
began to tell his tale, and said he was going to take the goose to a
christening. ‘Feel,’ said he, ‘how heavy it is, and yet it is only eight
weeks old. Whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it,
it has lived so well!’ ‘You’re right,’ said Hans, as he weighed it in
his hand; ‘but if you talk of fat, my pig is no trifle.’ Meantime the
countryman began to look grave, and shook his head. ‘Hark ye!’ said he,
‘my worthy friend, you seem a good sort of fellow, so I can’t help doing
you a kind turn. Your pig may get you into a scrape. In the village I
just came from, the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty. I was
dreadfully afraid when I saw you that you had got the squire’s pig. If
you have, and they catch you, it will be a bad job for you. The least
they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond. Can you swim?’

Poor Hans was sadly frightened. ‘Good man,’ cried he, ‘pray get me out
of this scrape. I know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born;
but he may have been the squire’s for aught I can tell: you know this
country better than I do, take my pig and give me the goose.’ ‘I ought
to have something into the bargain,’ said the countryman; ‘give a fat
goose for a pig, indeed! ‘Tis not everyone would do so much for you as
that. However, I will not be hard upon you, as you are in trouble.’ Then
he took the string in his hand, and drove off the pig by a side path;
while Hans went on the way homewards free from care. ‘After all,’
thought he, ‘that chap is pretty well taken in. I don’t care whose pig
it is, but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me. I
have much the best of the bargain. First there will be a capital roast;
then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months; and then there
are all the beautiful white feathers. I will put them into my pillow,
and then I am sure I shall sleep soundly without rocking. How happy my
mother will be! Talk of a pig, indeed! Give me a fine fat goose.’

As he came to the next village, he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel,
working and singing,

 ‘O’er hill and o’er dale
  So happy I roam,
  Work light and live well,
  All the world is my home;
  Then who so blythe, so merry as I?’

Hans stood looking on for a while, and at last said, ‘You must be well
off, master grinder! you seem so happy at your work.’ ‘Yes,’ said the
other, ‘mine is a golden trade; a good grinder never puts his hand
into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that
beautiful goose?’ ‘I did not buy it, I gave a pig for it.’ ‘And where
did you get the pig?’ ‘I gave a cow for it.’ ‘And the cow?’ ‘I gave a
horse for it.’ ‘And the horse?’ ‘I gave a lump of silver as big as my
head for it.’ ‘And the silver?’ ‘Oh! I worked hard for that seven long
years.’ ‘You have thriven well in the world hitherto,’ said the grinder,
‘now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand
in it, your fortune would be made.’ ‘Very true: but how is that to be
managed?’ ‘How? Why, you must turn grinder like myself,’ said the other;
‘you only want a grindstone; the rest will come of itself. Here is one
that is but little the worse for wear: I would not ask more than the
value of your goose for it--will you buy?’ ‘How can you ask?’ said
Hans; ‘I should be the happiest man in the world, if I could have money
whenever I put my hand in my pocket: what could I want more? there’s
the goose.’ ‘Now,’ said the grinder, as he gave him a common rough stone
that lay by his side, ‘this is a most capital stone; do but work it well
enough, and you can make an old nail cut with it.’

Hans took the stone, and went his way with a light heart: his eyes
sparkled for joy, and he said to himself, ‘Surely I must have been born
in a lucky hour; everything I could want or wish for comes of itself.
People are so kind; they seem really to think I do them a favour in
letting them make me rich, and giving me good bargains.’

Meantime he began to be tired, and hungry too, for he had given away his
last penny in his joy at getting the cow.

At last he could go no farther, for the stone tired him sadly: and he
dragged himself to the side of a river, that he might take a drink of
water, and rest a while. So he laid the stone carefully by his side on
the bank: but, as he stooped down to drink, he forgot it, pushed it a
little, and down it rolled, plump into the stream.

For a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water; then sprang
up and danced for joy, and again fell upon his knees and thanked Heaven,
with tears in his eyes, for its kindness in taking away his only plague,
the ugly heavy stone.

‘How happy am I!’ cried he; ‘nobody was ever so lucky as I.’ Then up he
got with a light heart, free from all his troubles, and walked on till
he reached his mother’s house, and told her how very easy the road to
good luck was.




JORINDA AND JORINDEL

There was once an old castle, that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy
wood, and in the castle lived an old fairy. Now this fairy could take
any shape she pleased. All the day long she flew about in the form of
an owl, or crept about the country like a cat; but at night she always
became an old woman again. When any young man came within a hundred
paces of her castle, he became quite fixed, and could not move a step
till she came and set him free; which she would not do till he had given
her his word never to come there again: but when any pretty maiden came
within that space she was changed into a bird, and the fairy put her
into a cage, and hung her up in a chamber in the castle. There were
seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle, and all with
beautiful birds in them.

Now there was once a maiden whose name was Jorinda. She was prettier
than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before, and a shepherd
lad, whose name was Jorindel, was very fond of her, and they were soon
to be married. One day they went to walk in the wood, that they might be
alone; and Jorindel said, ‘We must take care that we don’t go too near
to the fairy’s castle.’ It was a beautiful evening; the last rays of the
setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon
the green underwood beneath, and the turtle-doves sang from the tall
birches.

Jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun; Jorindel sat by her side; and
both felt sad, they knew not why; but it seemed as if they were to be
parted from one another for ever. They had wandered a long way; and when
they looked to see which way they should go home, they found themselves
at a loss to know what path to take.

The sun was setting fast, and already half of its circle had sunk behind
the hill: Jorindel on a sudden looked behind him, and saw through the
bushes that they had, without knowing it, sat down close under the old
walls of the castle. Then he shrank for fear, turned pale, and trembled.
Jorinda was just singing,

 ‘The ring-dove sang from the willow spray,
  Well-a-day! Well-a-day!
  He mourn’d for the fate of his darling mate,
  Well-a-day!’

when her song stopped suddenly. Jorindel turned to see the reason, and
beheld his Jorinda changed into a nightingale, so that her song ended
with a mournful _jug, jug_. An owl with fiery eyes flew three times
round them, and three times screamed:

 ‘Tu whu! Tu whu! Tu whu!’

Jorindel could not move; he stood fixed as a stone, and could neither
weep, nor speak, nor stir hand or foot. And now the sun went quite down;
the gloomy night came; the owl flew into a bush; and a moment after the
old fairy came forth pale and meagre, with staring eyes, and a nose and
chin that almost met one another.

She mumbled something to herself, seized the nightingale, and went away
with it in her hand. Poor Jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but
what could he do? He could not speak, he could not move from the spot
where he stood. At last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse
voice:

 ‘Till the prisoner is fast,
  And her doom is cast,
  There stay! Oh, stay!
  When the charm is around her,
  And the spell has bound her,
  Hie away! away!’

On a sudden Jorindel found himself free. Then he fell on his knees
before the fairy, and prayed her to give him back his dear Jorinda: but
she laughed at him, and said he should never see her again; then she
went her way.

He prayed, he wept, he sorrowed, but all in vain. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘what
will become of me?’ He could not go back to his own home, so he went to
a strange village, and employed himself in keeping sheep. Many a time
did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go,
but all in vain; he heard or saw nothing of Jorinda.

At last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower,
and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl; and he dreamt that he
plucked the flower, and went with it in his hand into the castle, and
that everything he touched with it was disenchanted, and that there he
found his Jorinda again.

In the morning when he awoke, he began to search over hill and dale for
this pretty flower; and eight long days he sought for it in vain: but
on the ninth day, early in the morning, he found the beautiful purple
flower; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop, as big as a costly
pearl. Then he plucked the flower, and set out and travelled day and
night, till he came again to the castle.

He walked nearer than a hundred paces to it, and yet he did not become
fixed as before, but found that he could go quite close up to the door.
Jorindel was very glad indeed to see this. Then he touched the door with
the flower, and it sprang open; so that he went in through the court,
and listened when he heard so many birds singing. At last he came to the
chamber where the fairy sat, with the seven hundred birds singing in
the seven hundred cages. When she saw Jorindel she was very angry, and
screamed with rage; but she could not come within two yards of him, for
the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard. He looked around at
the birds, but alas! there were many, many nightingales, and how then
should he find out which was his Jorinda? While he was thinking what to
do, he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages, and was making the
best of her way off through the door. He ran or flew after her, touched
the cage with the flower, and Jorinda stood before him, and threw her
arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever, as beautiful as when
they walked together in the wood.

Then he touched all the other birds with the flower, so that they all
took their old forms again; and he took Jorinda home, where they were
married, and lived happily together many years: and so did a good many
other lads, whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy’s
cages by themselves, much longer than they liked.




THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS

An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him
a great many years, but was now growing old and every day more and more
unfit for work. His master therefore was tired of keeping him and
began to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some
mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly off, and began his journey
towards the great city, ‘For there,’ thought he, ‘I may turn musician.’

After he had travelled a little way, he spied a dog lying by the
roadside and panting as if he were tired. ‘What makes you pant so, my
friend?’ said the ass. ‘Alas!’ said the dog, ‘my master was going to
knock me on the head, because I am old and weak, and can no longer make
myself useful to him in hunting; so I ran away; but what can I do to
earn my livelihood?’ ‘Hark ye!’ said the ass, ‘I am going to the great
city to turn musician: suppose you go with me, and try what you can
do in the same way?’ The dog said he was willing, and they jogged on
together.

They had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the
road and making a most rueful face. ‘Pray, my good lady,’ said the ass,
‘what’s the matter with you? You look quite out of spirits!’ ‘Ah, me!’
said the cat, ‘how can one be in good spirits when one’s life is in
danger? Because I am beginning to grow old, and had rather lie at my
ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice, my mistress
laid hold of me, and was going to drown me; and though I have been lucky
enough to get away from her, I do not know what I am to live upon.’
‘Oh,’ said the ass, ‘by all means go with us to the great city; you are
a good night singer, and may make your fortune as a musician.’ The cat
was pleased with the thought, and joined the party.

Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard, they saw a cock
perched upon a gate, and screaming out with all his might and main.
‘Bravo!’ said the ass; ‘upon my word, you make a famous noise; pray what
is all this about?’ ‘Why,’ said the cock, ‘I was just now saying that
we should have fine weather for our washing-day, and yet my mistress and
the cook don’t thank me for my pains, but threaten to cut off my
head tomorrow, and make broth of me for the guests that are coming
on Sunday!’ ‘Heaven forbid!’ said the ass, ‘come with us Master
Chanticleer; it will be better, at any rate, than staying here to have
your head cut off! Besides, who knows? If we care to sing in tune, we
may get up some kind of a concert; so come along with us.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said the cock: so they all four went on jollily together.

They could not, however, reach the great city the first day; so when
night came on, they went into a wood to sleep. The ass and the dog laid
themselves down under a great tree, and the cat climbed up into the
branches; while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer he
should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and then, according to
his custom, before he went to sleep, looked out on all sides of him to
see that everything was well. In doing this, he saw afar off something
bright and shining and calling to his companions said, ‘There must be a
house no great way off, for I see a light.’ ‘If that be the case,’ said
the ass, ‘we had better change our quarters, for our lodging is not the
best in the world!’ ‘Besides,’ added the dog, ‘I should not be the
worse for a bone or two, or a bit of meat.’ So they walked off together
towards the spot where Chanticleer had seen the light, and as they drew
near it became larger and brighter, till they at last came close to a
house in which a gang of robbers lived.

The ass, being the tallest of the company, marched up to the window and
peeped in. ‘Well, Donkey,’ said Chanticleer, ‘what do you see?’ ‘What
do I see?’ replied the ass. ‘Why, I see a table spread with all kinds of
good things, and robbers sitting round it making merry.’ ‘That would
be a noble lodging for us,’ said the cock. ‘Yes,’ said the ass, ‘if we
could only get in’; so they consulted together how they should contrive
to get the robbers out; and at last they hit upon a plan. The ass placed
himself upright on his hind legs, with his forefeet resting against the
window; the dog got upon his back; the cat scrambled up to the dog’s
shoulders, and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat’s head. When
all was ready a signal was given, and they began their music. The ass
brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock screamed; and then
they all broke through the window at once, and came tumbling into
the room, amongst the broken glass, with a most hideous clatter! The
robbers, who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert,
had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them,
and scampered away as fast as they could.

The coast once clear, our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what
the robbers had left, with as much eagerness as if they had not expected
to eat again for a month. As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they
put out the lights, and each once more sought out a resting-place to
his own liking. The donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in
the yard, the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door, the
cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes, and the
cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they were all
rather tired with their journey, they soon fell asleep.

But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were
out and that all seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in
too great a hurry to run away; and one of them, who was bolder than
the rest, went to see what was going on. Finding everything still, he
marched into the kitchen, and groped about till he found a match in
order to light a candle; and then, espying the glittering fiery eyes of
the cat, he mistook them for live coals, and held the match to them to
light it. But the cat, not understanding this joke, sprang at his face,
and spat, and scratched at him. This frightened him dreadfully, and away
he ran to the back door; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the
leg; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the
cock, who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his might. At
this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades, and told
the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house, and had spat at
him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers; how a man with a
knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door, and stabbed him
in the leg; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a
club, and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out,
‘Throw the rascal up here!’ After this the robbers never dared to go
back to the house; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters
that they took up their abode there; and there they are, I dare say, at
this very day.




OLD SULTAN

A shepherd had a faithful dog, called Sultan, who was grown very old,
and had lost all his teeth. And one day when the shepherd and his wife
were standing together before the house the shepherd said, ‘I will shoot
old Sultan tomorrow morning, for he is of no use now.’ But his wife
said, ‘Pray let the poor faithful creature live; he has served us well a
great many years, and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of
his days.’ ‘But what can we do with him?’ said the shepherd, ‘he has not
a tooth in his head, and the thieves don’t care for him at all; to
be sure he has served us, but then he did it to earn his livelihood;
tomorrow shall be his last day, depend upon it.’

Poor Sultan, who was lying close by them, heard all that the shepherd
and his wife said to one another, and was very much frightened to think
tomorrow would be his last day; so in the evening he went to his good
friend the wolf, who lived in the wood, and told him all his sorrows,
and how his master meant to kill him in the morning. ‘Make yourself
easy,’ said the wolf, ‘I will give you some good advice. Your master,
you know, goes out every morning very early with his wife into the
field; and they take their little child with them, and lay it down
behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work. Now do you lie
down close by the child, and pretend to be watching it, and I will come
out of the wood and run away with it; you must run after me as fast as
you can, and I will let it drop; then you may carry it back, and they
will think you have saved their child, and will be so thankful to you
that they will take care of you as long as you live.’ The dog liked this
plan very well; and accordingly so it was managed. The wolf ran with the
child a little way; the shepherd and his wife screamed out; but Sultan
soon overtook him, and carried the poor little thing back to his master
and mistress. Then the shepherd patted him on the head, and said, ‘Old
Sultan has saved our child from the wolf, and therefore he shall live
and be well taken care of, and have plenty to eat. Wife, go home, and
give him a good dinner, and let him have my old cushion to sleep on
as long as he lives.’ So from this time forward Sultan had all that he
could wish for.

Soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy, and said, ‘Now, my
good fellow, you must tell no tales, but turn your head the other way
when I want to taste one of the old shepherd’s fine fat sheep.’ ‘No,’
said the Sultan; ‘I will be true to my master.’ However, the wolf
thought he was in joke, and came one night to get a dainty morsel. But
Sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do; so he laid wait
for him behind the barn door, and when the wolf was busy looking out for
a good fat sheep, he had a stout cudgel laid about his back, that combed
his locks for him finely.

Then the wolf was very angry, and called Sultan ‘an old rogue,’ and
swore he would have his revenge. So the next morning the wolf sent the
boar to challenge Sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter. Now
Sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd’s old
three-legged cat; so he took her with him, and as the poor thing limped
along with some trouble, she stuck up her tail straight in the air.

The wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground; and when they
espied their enemies coming, and saw the cat’s long tail standing
straight in the air, they thought she was carrying a sword for Sultan to
fight with; and every time she limped, they thought she was picking up
a stone to throw at them; so they said they should not like this way of
fighting, and the boar lay down behind a bush, and the wolf jumped
up into a tree. Sultan and the cat soon came up, and looked about and
wondered that no one was there. The boar, however, had not quite hidden
himself, for his ears stuck out of the bush; and when he shook one of
them a little, the cat, seeing something move, and thinking it was a
mouse, sprang upon it, and bit and scratched it, so that the boar jumped
up and grunted, and ran away, roaring out, ‘Look up in the tree, there
sits the one who is to blame.’ So they looked up, and espied the wolf
sitting amongst the branches; and they called him a cowardly rascal,
and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of
himself, and had promised to be good friends again with old Sultan.




THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN

In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together a dish
of beans and wanted to cook them. So she made a fire on her hearth, and
that it might burn the quicker, she lighted it with a handful of straw.
When she was emptying the beans into the pan, one dropped without her
observing it, and lay on the ground beside a straw, and soon afterwards
a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two. Then the straw
began and said: ‘Dear friends, from whence do you come here?’ The coal
replied: ‘I fortunately sprang out of the fire, and if I had not escaped
by sheer force, my death would have been certain,--I should have been
burnt to ashes.’ The bean said: ‘I too have escaped with a whole skin,
but if the old woman had got me into the pan, I should have been made
into broth without any mercy, like my comrades.’ ‘And would a better
fate have fallen to my lot?’ said the straw. ‘The old woman has
destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke; she seized sixty of them at
once, and took their lives. I luckily slipped through her fingers.’

‘But what are we to do now?’ said the coal.

‘I think,’ answered the bean, ‘that as we have so fortunately escaped
death, we should keep together like good companions, and lest a new
mischance should overtake us here, we should go away together, and
repair to a foreign country.’

The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on their way
together. Soon, however, they came to a little brook, and as there was
no bridge or foot-plank, they did not know how they were to get over
it. The straw hit on a good idea, and said: ‘I will lay myself straight
across, and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge.’ The straw
therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other, and the coal,
who was of an impetuous disposition, tripped quite boldly on to the
newly-built bridge. But when she had reached the middle, and heard the
water rushing beneath her, she was after all, afraid, and stood still,
and ventured no farther. The straw, however, began to burn, broke in
two pieces, and fell into the stream. The coal slipped after her, hissed
when she got into the water, and breathed her last. The bean, who had
prudently stayed behind on the shore, could not but laugh at the event,
was unable to stop, and laughed so heartily that she burst. It would
have been all over with her, likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who
was travelling in search of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.
As he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread,
and sewed her together. The bean thanked him most prettily, but as the
tailor used black thread, all beans since then have a black seam.




BRIAR ROSE

A king and queen once upon a time reigned in a country a great way off,
where there were in those days fairies. Now this king and queen had
plenty of money, and plenty of fine clothes to wear, and plenty of
good things to eat and drink, and a coach to ride out in every day: but
though they had been married many years they had no children, and this
grieved them very much indeed. But one day as the queen was walking
by the side of the river, at the bottom of the garden, she saw a poor
little fish, that had thrown itself out of the water, and lay gasping
and nearly dead on the bank. Then the queen took pity on the little
fish, and threw it back again into the river; and before it swam away
it lifted its head out of the water and said, ‘I know what your wish is,
and it shall be fulfilled, in return for your kindness to me--you will
soon have a daughter.’ What the little fish had foretold soon came to
pass; and the queen had a little girl, so very beautiful that the king
could not cease looking on it for joy, and said he would hold a great
feast and make merry, and show the child to all the land. So he asked
his kinsmen, and nobles, and friends, and neighbours. But the queen
said, ‘I will have the fairies also, that they might be kind and good
to our little daughter.’ Now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom;
but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat
out of, they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her.
So twelve fairies came, each with a high red cap on her head, and red
shoes with high heels on her feet, and a long white wand in her hand:
and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all
their best gifts to the little princess. One gave her goodness, another
beauty, another riches, and so on till she had all that was good in the
world.

Just as eleven of them had done blessing her, a great noise was heard in
the courtyard, and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was
come, with a black cap on her head, and black shoes on her feet, and a
broomstick in her hand: and presently up she came into the dining-hall.
Now, as she had not been asked to the feast she was very angry, and
scolded the king and queen very much, and set to work to take her
revenge. So she cried out, ‘The king’s daughter shall, in her fifteenth
year, be wounded by a spindle, and fall down dead.’ Then the twelfth of
the friendly fairies, who had not yet given her gift, came forward, and
said that the evil wish must be fulfilled, but that she could soften its
mischief; so her gift was, that the king’s daughter, when the spindle
wounded her, should not really die, but should only fall asleep for a
hundred years.

However, the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from
the threatened evil; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom
should be bought up and burnt. But all the gifts of the first eleven
fairies were in the meantime fulfilled; for the princess was so
beautiful, and well behaved, and good, and wise, that everyone who knew
her loved her.

It happened that, on the very day she was fifteen years old, the king
and queen were not at home, and she was left alone in the palace. So she
roved about by herself, and looked at all the rooms and chambers, till
at last she came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase
ending with a little door. In the door there was a golden key, and when
she turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning
away very busily. ‘Why, how now, good mother,’ said the princess; ‘what
are you doing there?’ ‘Spinning,’ said the old lady, and nodded her
head, humming a tune, while buzz! went the wheel. ‘How prettily that
little thing turns round!’ said the princess, and took the spindle
and began to try and spin. But scarcely had she touched it, before the
fairy’s prophecy was fulfilled; the spindle wounded her, and she fell
down lifeless on the ground.

However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and the queen, who had just come home, and all their court,
fell asleep too; and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in
the court, the pigeons on the house-top, and the very flies slept upon
the walls. Even the fire on the hearth left off blazing, and went to
sleep; the jack stopped, and the spit that was turning about with a
goose upon it for the king’s dinner stood still; and the cook, who was
at that moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box
on the ear for something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell
asleep; the butler, who was slyly tasting the ale, fell asleep with the
jug at his lips: and thus everything stood still, and slept soundly.

A large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker; till at last the old palace was surrounded
and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen. But
there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping Briar
Rose (for so the king’s daughter was called): so that, from time to
time, several kings’ sons came, and tried to break through the thicket
into the palace. This, however, none of them could ever do; for the
thorns and bushes laid hold of them, as it were with hands; and there
they stuck fast, and died wretchedly.

After many, many years there came a king’s son into that land: and an
old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns; and how a beautiful
palace stood behind it, and how a wonderful princess, called Briar Rose,
lay in it asleep, with all her court. He told, too, how he had heard
from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had tried to
break through the thicket, but that they had all stuck fast in it, and
died. Then the young prince said, ‘All this shall not frighten me; I
will go and see this Briar Rose.’ The old man tried to hinder him, but
he was bent upon going.

Now that very day the hundred years were ended; and as the prince came
to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs, through
which he went with ease, and they shut in after him as thick as ever.
Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court lay the dogs
asleep; and the horses were standing in the stables; and on the roof sat
the pigeons fast asleep, with their heads under their wings. And when he
came into the palace, the flies were sleeping on the walls; the spit
was standing still; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips, going
to drink a draught; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be
plucked; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand, as
if she was going to beat the boy.

Then he went on still farther, and all was so still that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower, and opened
the door of the little room in which Briar Rose was; and there she lay,
fast asleep on a couch by the window. She looked so beautiful that he
could not take his eyes off her, so he stooped down and gave her a kiss.
But the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled
upon him; and they went out together; and soon the king and queen also
awoke, and all the court, and gazed on each other with great wonder.
And the horses shook themselves, and the dogs jumped up and barked; the
pigeons took their heads from under their wings, and looked about and
flew into the fields; the flies on the walls buzzed again; the fire in
the kitchen blazed up; round went the jack, and round went the spit,
with the goose for the king’s dinner upon it; the butler finished his
draught of ale; the maid went on plucking the fowl; and the cook gave
the boy the box on his ear.

And then the prince and Briar Rose were married, and the wedding feast
was given; and they lived happily together all their lives long.




THE DOG AND THE SPARROW

A shepherd’s dog had a master who took no care of him, but often let him
suffer the greatest hunger. At last he could bear it no longer; so he
took to his heels, and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood.
On the road he met a sparrow that said to him, ‘Why are you so sad,
my friend?’ ‘Because,’ said the dog, ‘I am very very hungry, and have
nothing to eat.’ ‘If that be all,’ answered the sparrow, ‘come with me
into the next town, and I will soon find you plenty of food.’ So on they
went together into the town: and as they passed by a butcher’s shop,
the sparrow said to the dog, ‘Stand there a little while till I peck you
down a piece of meat.’ So the sparrow perched upon the shelf: and having
first looked carefully about her to see if anyone was watching her, she
pecked and scratched at a steak that lay upon the edge of the shelf,
till at last down it fell. Then the dog snapped it up, and scrambled
away with it into a corner, where he soon ate it all up. ‘Well,’ said
the sparrow, ‘you shall have some more if you will; so come with me to
the next shop, and I will peck you down another steak.’ When the dog had
eaten this too, the sparrow said to him, ‘Well, my good friend, have you
had enough now?’ ‘I have had plenty of meat,’ answered he, ‘but I should
like to have a piece of bread to eat after it.’ ‘Come with me then,’
said the sparrow, ‘and you shall soon have that too.’ So she took him
to a baker’s shop, and pecked at two rolls that lay in the window, till
they fell down: and as the dog still wished for more, she took him to
another shop and pecked down some more for him. When that was eaten, the
sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now. ‘Yes,’ said he; ‘and
now let us take a walk a little way out of the town.’ So they both went
out upon the high road; but as the weather was warm, they had not gone
far before the dog said, ‘I am very much tired--I should like to take a
nap.’ ‘Very well,’ answered the sparrow, ‘do so, and in the meantime
I will perch upon that bush.’ So the dog stretched himself out on the
road, and fell fast asleep. Whilst he slept, there came by a carter with
a cart drawn by three horses, and loaded with two casks of wine. The
sparrow, seeing that the carter did not turn out of the way, but would
go on in the track in which the dog lay, so as to drive over him, called
out, ‘Stop! stop! Mr Carter, or it shall be the worse for you.’ But the
carter, grumbling to himself, ‘You make it the worse for me, indeed!
what can you do?’ cracked his whip, and drove his cart over the poor
dog, so that the wheels crushed him to death. ‘There,’ cried the
sparrow, ‘thou cruel villain, thou hast killed my friend the dog. Now
mind what I say. This deed of thine shall cost thee all thou art worth.’
‘Do your worst, and welcome,’ said the brute, ‘what harm can you do me?’
and passed on. But the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart, and
pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it; and then
all the wine ran out, without the carter seeing it. At last he looked
round, and saw that the cart was dripping, and the cask quite empty.
‘What an unlucky wretch I am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow, as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses, and
pecked at him till he reared up and kicked. When the carter saw this,
he drew out his hatchet and aimed a blow at the sparrow, meaning to kill
her; but she flew away, and the blow fell upon the poor horse’s head
with such force, that he fell down dead. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’
cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow. And as the carter
went on with the other two horses, she again crept under the tilt of the
cart, and pecked out the bung of the second cask, so that all the wine
ran out. When the carter saw this, he again cried out, ‘Miserable wretch
that I am!’ But the sparrow answered, ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ and
perched on the head of the second horse, and pecked at him too. The
carter ran up and struck at her again with his hatchet; but away she
flew, and the blow fell upon the second horse and killed him on the
spot. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ said he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow; and perching upon the third horse, she began to peck him
too. The carter was mad with fury; and without looking about him, or
caring what he was about, struck again at the sparrow; but killed his
third horse as he done the other two. ‘Alas! miserable wretch that I
am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ answered the sparrow as she flew
away; ‘now will I plague and punish thee at thy own house.’ The
carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him, and to go home
overflowing with rage and vexation. ‘Alas!’ said he to his wife, ‘what
ill luck has befallen me!--my wine is all spilt, and my horses all three
dead.’ ‘Alas! husband,’ replied she, ‘and a wicked bird has come into
the house, and has brought with her all the birds in the world, I am
sure, and they have fallen upon our corn in the loft, and are eating it
up at such a rate!’ Away ran the husband upstairs, and saw thousands of
birds sitting upon the floor eating up his corn, with the sparrow in the
midst of them. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ cried the carter; for he saw
that the corn was almost all gone. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the
sparrow; ‘thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life yet!’ and away she flew.

The carter seeing that he had thus lost all that he had, went down
into his kitchen; and was still not sorry for what he had done, but sat
himself angrily and sulkily in the chimney corner. But the sparrow sat
on the outside of the window, and cried ‘Carter! thy cruelty shall cost
thee thy life!’ With that he jumped up in a rage, seized his hatchet,
and threw it at the sparrow; but it missed her, and only broke the
window. The sparrow now hopped in, perched upon the window-seat, and
cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life!’ Then he became mad and
blind with rage, and struck the window-seat with such force that he
cleft it in two: and as the sparrow flew from place to place, the carter
and his wife were so furious, that they broke all their furniture,
glasses, chairs, benches, the table, and at last the walls, without
touching the bird at all. In the end, however, they caught her: and the
wife said, ‘Shall I kill her at once?’ ‘No,’ cried he, ‘that is letting
her off too easily: she shall die a much more cruel death; I will eat
her.’ But the sparrow began to flutter about, and stretch out her neck
and cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life yet!’ With that he
could wait no longer: so he gave his wife the hatchet, and cried, ‘Wife,
strike at the bird and kill her in my hand.’ And the wife struck; but
she missed her aim, and hit her husband on the head so that he fell down
dead, and the sparrow flew quietly home to her nest.




THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES

There was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters. They slept in
twelve beds all in one room; and when they went to bed, the doors were
shut and locked up; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite
worn through as if they had been danced in all night; and yet nobody
could find out how it happened, or where they had been.

Then the king made it known to all the land, that if any person could
discover the secret, and find out where it was that the princesses
danced in the night, he should have the one he liked best for his
wife, and should be king after his death; but whoever tried and did not
succeed, after three days and nights, should be put to death.

A king’s son soon came. He was well entertained, and in the evening was
taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their
twelve beds. There he was to sit and watch where they went to dance;
and, in order that nothing might pass without his hearing it, the door
of his chamber was left open. But the king’s son soon fell asleep; and
when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been
dancing, for the soles of their shoes were full of holes. The same thing
happened the second and third night: so the king ordered his head to be
cut off. After him came several others; but they had all the same luck,
and all lost their lives in the same manner.

Now it chanced that an old soldier, who had been wounded in battle
and could fight no longer, passed through the country where this king
reigned: and as he was travelling through a wood, he met an old woman,
who asked him where he was going. ‘I hardly know where I am going, or
what I had better do,’ said the soldier; ‘but I think I should like very
well to find out where it is that the princesses dance, and then in time
I might be a king.’ ‘Well,’ said the old dame, ‘that is no very hard
task: only take care not to drink any of the wine which one of the
princesses will bring to you in the evening; and as soon as she leaves
you pretend to be fast asleep.’

Then she gave him a cloak, and said, ‘As soon as you put that on
you will become invisible, and you will then be able to follow the
princesses wherever they go.’ When the soldier heard all this good
counsel, he determined to try his luck: so he went to the king, and said
he was willing to undertake the task.

He was as well received as the others had been, and the king ordered
fine royal robes to be given him; and when the evening came he was led
to the outer chamber. Just as he was going to lie down, the eldest of
the princesses brought him a cup of wine; but the soldier threw it all
away secretly, taking care not to drink a drop. Then he laid himself
down on his bed, and in a little while began to snore very loud as if
he was fast asleep. When the twelve princesses heard this they laughed
heartily; and the eldest said, ‘This fellow too might have done a wiser
thing than lose his life in this way!’ Then they rose up and opened
their drawers and boxes, and took out all their fine clothes, and
dressed themselves at the glass, and skipped about as if they were eager
to begin dancing. But the youngest said, ‘I don’t know how it is, while
you are so happy I feel very uneasy; I am sure some mischance will
befall us.’ ‘You simpleton,’ said the eldest, ‘you are always afraid;
have you forgotten how many kings’ sons have already watched in vain?
And as for this soldier, even if I had not given him his sleeping
draught, he would have slept soundly enough.’

When they were all ready, they went and looked at the soldier; but he
snored on, and did not stir hand or foot: so they thought they were
quite safe; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands,
and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open. The soldier
saw them going down through the trap-door one after another, the eldest
leading the way; and thinking he had no time to lose, he jumped up, put
on the cloak which the old woman had given him, and followed them;
but in the middle of the stairs he trod on the gown of the youngest
princess, and she cried out to her sisters, ‘All is not right; someone
took hold of my gown.’ ‘You silly creature!’ said the eldest, ‘it is
nothing but a nail in the wall.’ Then down they all went, and at the
bottom they found themselves in a most delightful grove of trees; and
the leaves were all of silver, and glittered and sparkled beautifully.
The soldier wished to take away some token of the place; so he broke
off a little branch, and there came a loud noise from the tree. Then the
youngest daughter said again, ‘I am sure all is not right--did not you
hear that noise? That never happened before.’ But the eldest said, ‘It
is only our princes, who are shouting for joy at our approach.’

Then they came to another grove of trees, where all the leaves were of
gold; and afterwards to a third, where the leaves were all glittering
diamonds. And the soldier broke a branch from each; and every time there
was a loud noise, which made the youngest sister tremble with fear; but
the eldest still said, it was only the princes, who were crying for joy.
So they went on till they came to a great lake; and at the side of the
lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them,
who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses.

One of the princesses went into each boat, and the soldier stepped into
the same boat with the youngest. As they were rowing over the lake, the
prince who was in the boat with the youngest princess and the soldier
said, ‘I do not know why it is, but though I am rowing with all my might
we do not get on so fast as usual, and I am quite tired: the boat
seems very heavy today.’ ‘It is only the heat of the weather,’ said the
princess: ‘I feel it very warm too.’

On the other side of the lake stood a fine illuminated castle, from
which came the merry music of horns and trumpets. There they all landed,
and went into the castle, and each prince danced with his princess; and
the soldier, who was all the time invisible, danced with them too; and
when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her, he drank it
all up, so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty. At this,
too, the youngest sister was terribly frightened, but the eldest always
silenced her. They danced on till three o’clock in the morning, and then
all their shoes were worn out, so that they were obliged to leave off.
The princes rowed them back again over the lake (but this time the
soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess); and on the
opposite shore they took leave of each other, the princesses promising
to come again the next night.

When they came to the stairs, the soldier ran on before the princesses,
and laid himself down; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very
much tired, they heard him snoring in his bed; so they said, ‘Now all
is quite safe’; then they undressed themselves, put away their fine
clothes, pulled off their shoes, and went to bed. In the morning the
soldier said nothing about what had happened, but determined to see more
of this strange adventure, and went again the second and third night;
and every thing happened just as before; the princesses danced each time
till their shoes were worn to pieces, and then returned home. However,
on the third night the soldier carried away one of the golden cups as a
token of where he had been.

As soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret, he was taken
before the king with the three branches and the golden cup; and the
twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would
say. And when the king asked him. ‘Where do my twelve daughters dance at
night?’ he answered, ‘With twelve princes in a castle under ground.’ And
then he told the king all that had happened, and showed him the three
branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him. Then the king
called for the princesses, and asked them whether what the soldier said
was true: and when they saw that they were discovered, and that it was
of no use to deny what had happened, they confessed it all. And the king
asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife; and he
answered, ‘I am not very young, so I will have the eldest.’--And they
were married that very day, and the soldier was chosen to be the king’s
heir.




THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE

There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty, close
by the seaside. The fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing; and
one day, as he sat on the shore with his rod, looking at the sparkling
waves and watching his line, all on a sudden his float was dragged away
deep into the water: and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish.
But the fish said, ‘Pray let me live! I am not a real fish; I am an
enchanted prince: put me in the water again, and let me go!’ ‘Oh, ho!’
said the man, ‘you need not make so many words about the matter; I will
have nothing to do with a fish that can talk: so swim away, sir, as soon
as you please!’ Then he put him back into the water, and the fish darted
straight down to the bottom, and left a long streak of blood behind him
on the wave.

When the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty, he told her how
he had caught a great fish, and how it had told him it was an enchanted
prince, and how, on hearing it speak, he had let it go again. ‘Did not
you ask it for anything?’ said the wife, ‘we live very wretchedly here,
in this nasty dirty pigsty; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug
little cottage.’

The fisherman did not much like the business: however, he went to the
seashore; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and
green. And he stood at the water’s edge, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, ‘Well, what is her will?
What does your wife want?’ ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘she says that when
I had caught you, I ought to have asked you for something before I let
you go; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty, and wants
a snug little cottage.’ ‘Go home, then,’ said the fish; ‘she is in the
cottage already!’ So the man went home, and saw his wife standing at the
door of a nice trim little cottage. ‘Come in, come in!’ said she; ‘is
not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had?’ And there was a
parlour, and a bedchamber, and a kitchen; and behind the cottage there
was a little garden, planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits; and
there was a courtyard behind, full of ducks and chickens. ‘Ah!’ said the
fisherman, ‘how happily we shall live now!’ ‘We will try to do so, at
least,’ said his wife.

Everything went right for a week or two, and then Dame Ilsabill said,
‘Husband, there is not near room enough for us in this cottage; the
courtyard and the garden are a great deal too small; I should like to
have a large stone castle to live in: go to the fish again and tell him
to give us a castle.’ ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘I don’t like to go to
him again, for perhaps he will be angry; we ought to be easy with this
pretty cottage to live in.’ ‘Nonsense!’ said the wife; ‘he will do it
very willingly, I know; go along and try!’

The fisherman went, but his heart was very heavy: and when he came to
the sea, it looked blue and gloomy, though it was very calm; and he went
close to the edge of the waves, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the man,
dolefully, ‘my wife wants to live in a stone castle.’ ‘Go home, then,’
said the fish; ‘she is standing at the gate of it already.’ So away went
the fisherman, and found his wife standing before the gate of a great
castle. ‘See,’ said she, ‘is not this grand?’ With that they went into
the castle together, and found a great many servants there, and the
rooms all richly furnished, and full of golden chairs and tables; and
behind the castle was a garden, and around it was a park half a
mile long, full of sheep, and goats, and hares, and deer; and in the
courtyard were stables and cow-houses. ‘Well,’ said the man, ‘now we
will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of
our lives.’ ‘Perhaps we may,’ said the wife; ‘but let us sleep upon it,
before we make up our minds to that.’ So they went to bed.

The next morning when Dame Ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight, and
she jogged the fisherman with her elbow, and said, ‘Get up, husband,
and bestir yourself, for we must be king of all the land.’ ‘Wife, wife,’
said the man, ‘why should we wish to be the king? I will not be king.’
‘Then I will,’ said she. ‘But, wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘how can you
be king--the fish cannot make you a king?’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘say
no more about it, but go and try! I will be king.’ So the man went away
quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king. This time
the sea looked a dark grey colour, and was overspread with curling waves
and the ridges of foam as he cried out:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Alas!’ said the poor
man, ‘my wife wants to be king.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is king
already.’

Then the fisherman went home; and as he came close to the palace he saw
a troop of soldiers, and heard the sound of drums and trumpets. And when
he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds,
with a golden crown upon her head; and on each side of her stood six
fair maidens, each a head taller than the other. ‘Well, wife,’ said the
fisherman, ‘are you king?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am king.’ And when he had
looked at her for a long time, he said, ‘Ah, wife! what a fine thing it
is to be king! Now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long
as we live.’ ‘I don’t know how that may be,’ said she; ‘never is a long
time. I am king, it is true; but I begin to be tired of that, and I
think I should like to be emperor.’ ‘Alas, wife! why should you wish to
be emperor?’ said the fisherman. ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘go to the fish!
I say I will be emperor.’ ‘Ah, wife!’ replied the fisherman, ‘the fish
cannot make an emperor, I am sure, and I should not like to ask him for
such a thing.’ ‘I am king,’ said Ilsabill, ‘and you are my slave; so go
at once!’

So the fisherman was forced to go; and he muttered as he went along,
‘This will come to no good, it is too much to ask; the fish will be
tired at last, and then we shall be sorry for what we have done.’ He
soon came to the seashore; and the water was quite black and muddy, and
a mighty whirlwind blew over the waves and rolled them about, but he
went as near as he could to the water’s brink, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman,
‘she wants to be emperor.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is emperor
already.’

So he went home again; and as he came near he saw his wife Ilsabill
sitting on a very lofty throne made of solid gold, with a great crown on
her head full two yards high; and on each side of her stood her guards
and attendants in a row, each one smaller than the other, from the
tallest giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger. And
before her stood princes, and dukes, and earls: and the fisherman went
up to her and said, ‘Wife, are you emperor?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am
emperor.’ ‘Ah!’ said the man, as he gazed upon her, ‘what a fine thing
it is to be emperor!’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘why should we stop at being
emperor? I will be pope next.’ ‘O wife, wife!’ said he, ‘how can you be
pope? there is but one pope at a time in Christendom.’ ‘Husband,’ said
she, ‘I will be pope this very day.’ ‘But,’ replied the husband, ‘the
fish cannot make you pope.’ ‘What nonsense!’ said she; ‘if he can make
an emperor, he can make a pope: go and try him.’

So the fisherman went. But when he came to the shore the wind was raging
and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves, and the ships were
in trouble, and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows. In the
middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky, but towards
the south all was red, as if a dreadful storm was rising. At this sight
the fisherman was dreadfully frightened, and he trembled so that his
knees knocked together: but still he went down near to the shore, and
said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘my
wife wants to be pope.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is pope already.’

Then the fisherman went home, and found Ilsabill sitting on a throne
that was two miles high. And she had three great crowns on her head, and
around her stood all the pomp and power of the Church. And on each side
of her were two rows of burning lights, of all sizes, the greatest as
large as the highest and biggest tower in the world, and the least no
larger than a small rushlight. ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, as he looked
at all this greatness, ‘are you pope?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am pope.’
‘Well, wife,’ replied he, ‘it is a grand thing to be pope; and now
you must be easy, for you can be nothing greater.’ ‘I will think about
that,’ said the wife. Then they went to bed: but Dame Ilsabill could not
sleep all night for thinking what she should be next. At last, as she
was dropping asleep, morning broke, and the sun rose. ‘Ha!’ thought she,
as she woke up and looked at it through the window, ‘after all I cannot
prevent the sun rising.’ At this thought she was very angry, and wakened
her husband, and said, ‘Husband, go to the fish and tell him I must
be lord of the sun and moon.’ The fisherman was half asleep, but the
thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed.
‘Alas, wife!’ said he, ‘cannot you be easy with being pope?’ ‘No,’
said she, ‘I am very uneasy as long as the sun and moon rise without my
leave. Go to the fish at once!’

Then the man went shivering with fear; and as he was going down to
the shore a dreadful storm arose, so that the trees and the very rocks
shook. And all the heavens became black with stormy clouds, and the
lightnings played, and the thunders rolled; and you might have seen in
the sea great black waves, swelling up like mountains with crowns of
white foam upon their heads. And the fisherman crept towards the sea,
and cried out, as well as he could:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘she wants to
be lord of the sun and moon.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish, ‘to your pigsty
again.’

And there they live to this very day.




THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR

Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest,
and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said: ‘Brother
wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?’ ‘That is the King of birds,’
said the wolf, ‘before whom we must bow down.’ In reality the bird was
the willow-wren. ‘IF that’s the case,’ said the bear, ‘I should very
much like to see his royal palace; come, take me thither.’ ‘That is not
done quite as you seem to think,’ said the wolf; ‘you must wait until
the Queen comes,’ Soon afterwards, the Queen arrived with some food in
her beak, and the lord King came too, and they began to feed their young
ones. The bear would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him
back by the sleeve, and said: ‘No, you must wait until the lord and lady
Queen have gone away again.’ So they took stock of the hole where the
nest lay, and trotted away. The bear, however, could not rest until he
had seen the royal palace, and when a short time had passed, went to it
again. The King and Queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw
five or six young ones lying there. ‘Is that the royal palace?’ cried
the bear; ‘it is a wretched palace, and you are not King’s children, you
are disreputable children!’ When the young wrens heard that, they were
frightfully angry, and screamed: ‘No, that we are not! Our parents are
honest people! Bear, you will have to pay for that!’

The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went into their
holes. The young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry and scream, and
when their parents again brought food they said: ‘We will not so much as
touch one fly’s leg, no, not if we were dying of hunger, until you have
settled whether we are respectable children or not; the bear has been
here and has insulted us!’ Then the old King said: ‘Be easy, he shall
be punished,’ and he at once flew with the Queen to the bear’s cave, and
called in: ‘Old Growler, why have you insulted my children? You shall
suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war.’ Thus war was
announced to the Bear, and all four-footed animals were summoned to take
part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other animal the earth
contained. And the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the
air, not only birds, large and small, but midges, and hornets, bees and
flies had to come.

When the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies
to discover who was the enemy’s commander-in-chief. The gnat, who was
the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled,
and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be
announced. There stood the bear, and he called the fox before him
and said: ‘Fox, you are the most cunning of all animals, you shall be
general and lead us.’ ‘Good,’ said the fox, ‘but what signal shall we
agree upon?’ No one knew that, so the fox said: ‘I have a fine long
bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers. When I lift
my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you must charge; but if I
let it hang down, run away as fast as you can.’ When the gnat had heard
that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, down to the minutest
detail, to the willow-wren. When day broke, and the battle was to begin,
all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the
earth trembled. The willow-wren with his army also came flying through
the air with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one
was uneasy and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each
other. But the willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to settle
beneath the fox’s tail, and sting with all his might. When the fox felt
the first string, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but
he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air; at the second
sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment; at the third, he could
hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between his legs. When
the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began to flee, each
into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.

Then the King and Queen flew home to their children and cried:
‘Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart’s content, we have won
the battle!’ But the young wrens said: ‘We will not eat yet, the bear
must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are honourable
children, before we will do that.’ Then the willow-wren flew to the
bear’s hole and cried: ‘Growler, you are to come to the nest to my
children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of your body shall
be broken.’ So the bear crept thither in the greatest fear, and begged
their pardon. And now at last the young wrens were satisfied, and sat
down together and ate and drank, and made merry till quite late into the
night.




THE FROG-PRINCE

One fine evening a young princess put on her bonnet and clogs, and went
out to take a walk by herself in a wood; and when she came to a cool
spring of water, that rose in the midst of it, she sat herself down
to rest a while. Now she had a golden ball in her hand, which was her
favourite plaything; and she was always tossing it up into the air, and
catching it again as it fell. After a time she threw it up so high that
she missed catching it as it fell; and the ball bounded away, and rolled
along upon the ground, till at last it fell down into the spring. The
princess looked into the spring after her ball, but it was very deep, so
deep that she could not see the bottom of it. Then she began to bewail
her loss, and said, ‘Alas! if I could only get my ball again, I would
give all my fine clothes and jewels, and everything that I have in the
world.’

Whilst she was speaking, a frog put its head out of the water, and said,
‘Princess, why do you weep so bitterly?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘what can you
do for me, you nasty frog? My golden ball has fallen into the spring.’
The frog said, ‘I want not your pearls, and jewels, and fine clothes;
but if you will love me, and let me live with you and eat from off
your golden plate, and sleep upon your bed, I will bring you your ball
again.’ ‘What nonsense,’ thought the princess, ‘this silly frog is
talking! He can never even get out of the spring to visit me, though
he may be able to get my ball for me, and therefore I will tell him he
shall have what he asks.’ So she said to the frog, ‘Well, if you will
bring me my ball, I will do all you ask.’ Then the frog put his head
down, and dived deep under the water; and after a little while he came
up again, with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the edge of the
spring. As soon as the young princess saw her ball, she ran to pick
it up; and she was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again, that she
never thought of the frog, but ran home with it as fast as she could.
The frog called after her, ‘Stay, princess, and take me with you as you
said,’ But she did not stop to hear a word.

The next day, just as the princess had sat down to dinner, she heard a
strange noise--tap, tap--plash, plash--as if something was coming up the
marble staircase: and soon afterwards there was a gentle knock at the
door, and a little voice cried out and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the princess ran to the door and opened it, and there she saw
the frog, whom she had quite forgotten. At this sight she was sadly
frightened, and shutting the door as fast as she could came back to her
seat. The king, her father, seeing that something had frightened her,
asked her what was the matter. ‘There is a nasty frog,’ said she, ‘at
the door, that lifted my ball for me out of the spring this morning: I
told him that he should live with me here, thinking that he could never
get out of the spring; but there he is at the door, and he wants to come
in.’

While she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the king said to the young princess, ‘As you have given your word
you must keep it; so go and let him in.’ She did so, and the frog hopped
into the room, and then straight on--tap, tap--plash, plash--from the
bottom of the room to the top, till he came up close to the table where
the princess sat. ‘Pray lift me upon chair,’ said he to the princess,
‘and let me sit next to you.’ As soon as she had done this, the frog
said, ‘Put your plate nearer to me, that I may eat out of it.’ This
she did, and when he had eaten as much as he could, he said, ‘Now I am
tired; carry me upstairs, and put me into your bed.’ And the princess,
though very unwilling, took him up in her hand, and put him upon the
pillow of her own bed, where he slept all night long. As soon as it was
light he jumped up, hopped downstairs, and went out of the house.
‘Now, then,’ thought the princess, ‘at last he is gone, and I shall be
troubled with him no more.’

But she was mistaken; for when night came again she heard the same
tapping at the door; and the frog came once more, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

And when the princess opened the door the frog came in, and slept upon
her pillow as before, till the morning broke. And the third night he did
the same. But when the princess awoke on the following morning she was
astonished to see, instead of the frog, a handsome prince, gazing on her
with the most beautiful eyes she had ever seen, and standing at the head
of her bed.

He told her that he had been enchanted by a spiteful fairy, who had
changed him into a frog; and that he had been fated so to abide till
some princess should take him out of the spring, and let him eat from
her plate, and sleep upon her bed for three nights. ‘You,’ said the
prince, ‘have broken his cruel charm, and now I have nothing to wish for
but that you should go with me into my father’s kingdom, where I will
marry you, and love you as long as you live.’

The young princess, you may be sure, was not long in saying ‘Yes’ to
all this; and as they spoke a gay coach drove up, with eight beautiful
horses, decked with plumes of feathers and a golden harness; and behind
the coach rode the prince’s servant, faithful Heinrich, who had bewailed
the misfortunes of his dear master during his enchantment so long and so
bitterly, that his heart had well-nigh burst.

They then took leave of the king, and got into the coach with eight
horses, and all set out, full of joy and merriment, for the prince’s
kingdom, which they reached safely; and there they lived happily a great
many years.




CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much
to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at
length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together.
‘But we must make a provision for winter, or else we shall suffer
from hunger,’ said the cat; ‘and you, little mouse, cannot venture
everywhere, or you will be caught in a trap some day.’ The good advice
was followed, and a pot of fat was bought, but they did not know where
to put it. At length, after much consideration, the cat said: ‘I know no
place where it will be better stored up than in the church, for no one
dares take anything away from there. We will set it beneath the altar,
and not touch it until we are really in need of it.’ So the pot was
placed in safety, but it was not long before the cat had a great
yearning for it, and said to the mouse: ‘I want to tell you something,
little mouse; my cousin has brought a little son into the world, and has
asked me to be godmother; he is white with brown spots, and I am to hold
him over the font at the christening. Let me go out today, and you look
after the house by yourself.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ answered the mouse, ‘by all
means go, and if you get anything very good to eat, think of me. I
should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.’ All this,
however, was untrue; the cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to
be godmother. She went straight to the church, stole to the pot of fat,
began to lick at it, and licked the top of the fat off. Then she took a
walk upon the roofs of the town, looked out for opportunities, and then
stretched herself in the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought
of the pot of fat, and not until it was evening did she return home.
‘Well, here you are again,’ said the mouse, ‘no doubt you have had a
merry day.’ ‘All went off well,’ answered the cat. ‘What name did they
give the child?’ ‘Top off!’ said the cat quite coolly. ‘Top off!’ cried
the mouse, ‘that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in
your family?’ ‘What does that matter,’ said the cat, ‘it is no worse
than Crumb-stealer, as your godchildren are called.’

Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning. She said to
the mouse: ‘You must do me a favour, and once more manage the house for
a day alone. I am again asked to be godmother, and, as the child has a
white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.’ The good mouse consented,
but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church, and devoured
half the pot of fat. ‘Nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to
oneself,’ said she, and was quite satisfied with her day’s work. When
she went home the mouse inquired: ‘And what was the child christened?’
‘Half-done,’ answered the cat. ‘Half-done! What are you saying? I
never heard the name in my life, I’ll wager anything it is not in the
calendar!’

The cat’s mouth soon began to water for some more licking. ‘All good
things go in threes,’ said she, ‘I am asked to stand godmother again.
The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but with that
exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body; this only
happens once every few years, you will let me go, won’t you?’ ‘Top-off!
Half-done!’ answered the mouse, ‘they are such odd names, they make me
very thoughtful.’ ‘You sit at home,’ said the cat, ‘in your dark-grey
fur coat and long tail, and are filled with fancies, that’s because
you do not go out in the daytime.’ During the cat’s absence the mouse
cleaned the house, and put it in order, but the greedy cat entirely
emptied the pot of fat. ‘When everything is eaten up one has some
peace,’ said she to herself, and well filled and fat she did not return
home till night. The mouse at once asked what name had been given to
the third child. ‘It will not please you more than the others,’ said the
cat. ‘He is called All-gone.’ ‘All-gone,’ cried the mouse ‘that is the
most suspicious name of all! I have never seen it in print. All-gone;
what can that mean?’ and she shook her head, curled herself up, and lay
down to sleep.

From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother, but
when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found
outside, the mouse thought of their provision, and said: ‘Come, cat,
we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves--we
shall enjoy that.’ ‘Yes,’ answered the cat, ‘you will enjoy it as much
as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the
window.’ They set out on their way, but when they arrived, the pot of
fat certainly was still in its place, but it was empty. ‘Alas!’ said the
mouse, ‘now I see what has happened, now it comes to light! You are a true
friend! You have devoured all when you were standing godmother. First
top off, then half-done, then--’ ‘Will you hold your tongue,’ cried the
cat, ‘one word more, and I will eat you too.’ ‘All-gone’ was already on
the poor mouse’s lips; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang
on her, seized her, and swallowed her down. Verily, that is the way of
the world.




THE GOOSE-GIRL

The king of a great land died, and left his queen to take care of their
only child. This child was a daughter, who was very beautiful; and her
mother loved her dearly, and was very kind to her. And there was a good
fairy too, who was fond of the princess, and helped her mother to watch
over her. When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived a
great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she
got ready to set off on her journey to his country. Then the queen her
mother, packed up a great many costly things; jewels, and gold, and
silver; trinkets, fine dresses, and in short everything that became a
royal bride. And she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her, and give
her into the bridegroom’s hands; and each had a horse for the journey.
Now the princess’s horse was the fairy’s gift, and it was called Falada,
and could speak.

When the time came for them to set out, the fairy went into her
bed-chamber, and took a little knife, and cut off a lock of her hair,
and gave it to the princess, and said, ‘Take care of it, dear child; for
it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road.’ Then they all took
a sorrowful leave of the princess; and she put the lock of hair into
her bosom, got upon her horse, and set off on her journey to her
bridegroom’s kingdom.

One day, as they were riding along by a brook, the princess began to
feel very thirsty: and she said to her maid, ‘Pray get down, and fetch
me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook, for I want to
drink.’ ‘Nay,’ said the maid, ‘if you are thirsty, get off yourself, and
stoop down by the water and drink; I shall not be your waiting-maid any
longer.’ Then she was so thirsty that she got down, and knelt over the
little brook, and drank; for she was frightened, and dared not bring out
her golden cup; and she wept and said, ‘Alas! what will become of me?’
And the lock answered her, and said:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

But the princess was very gentle and meek, so she said nothing to her
maid’s ill behaviour, but got upon her horse again.

Then all rode farther on their journey, till the day grew so warm, and
the sun so scorching, that the bride began to feel very thirsty again;
and at last, when they came to a river, she forgot her maid’s rude
speech, and said, ‘Pray get down, and fetch me some water to drink in
my golden cup.’ But the maid answered her, and even spoke more haughtily
than before: ‘Drink if you will, but I shall not be your waiting-maid.’
Then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse, and lay
down, and held her head over the running stream, and cried and said,
‘What will become of me?’ And the lock of hair answered her again:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And as she leaned down to drink, the lock of hair fell from her bosom,
and floated away with the water. Now she was so frightened that she did
not see it; but her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the
charm; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power, now that
she had lost the hair. So when the bride had done drinking, and would
have got upon Falada again, the maid said, ‘I shall ride upon Falada,
and you may have my horse instead’; so she was forced to give up her
horse, and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her
maid’s shabby ones.

At last, as they drew near the end of their journey, this treacherous
servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had
happened. But Falada saw it all, and marked it well.

Then the waiting-maid got upon Falada, and the real bride rode upon the
other horse, and they went on in this way till at last they came to the
royal court. There was great joy at their coming, and the prince flew to
meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she was the one
who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber;
but the true princess was told to stay in the court below.

Now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do; so he
amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window, looking at what was
going on; and he saw her in the courtyard. As she looked very pretty,
and too delicate for a waiting-maid, he went up into the royal chamber
to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her, that was thus left
standing in the court below. ‘I brought her with me for the sake of her
company on the road,’ said she; ‘pray give the girl some work to do,
that she may not be idle.’ The old king could not for some time think
of any work for her to do; but at last he said, ‘I have a lad who takes
care of my geese; she may go and help him.’ Now the name of this lad,
that the real bride was to help in watching the king’s geese, was
Curdken.

But the false bride said to the prince, ‘Dear husband, pray do me one
piece of kindness.’ ‘That I will,’ said the prince. ‘Then tell one of
your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon, for it
was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road’; but the truth was,
she was very much afraid lest Falada should some day or other speak, and
tell all she had done to the princess. She carried her point, and the
faithful Falada was killed; but when the true princess heard of it, she
wept, and begged the man to nail up Falada’s head against a large
dark gate of the city, through which she had to pass every morning
and evening, that there she might still see him sometimes. Then the
slaughterer said he would do as she wished; and cut off the head, and
nailed it up under the dark gate.

Early the next morning, as she and Curdken went out through the gate,
she said sorrowfully:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then they went out of the city, and drove the geese on. And when she
came to the meadow, she sat down upon a bank there, and let down her
waving locks of hair, which were all of pure silver; and when Curdken
saw it glitter in the sun, he ran up, and would have pulled some of the
locks out, but she cried:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then there came a wind, so strong that it blew off Curdken’s hat; and
away it flew over the hills: and he was forced to turn and run after
it; till, by the time he came back, she had done combing and curling her
hair, and had put it up again safe. Then he was very angry and sulky,
and would not speak to her at all; but they watched the geese until it
grew dark in the evening, and then drove them homewards.

The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor
girl looked up at Falada’s head, and cried:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then she drove on the geese, and sat down again in the meadow, and began
to comb out her hair as before; and Curdken ran up to her, and wanted to
take hold of it; but she cried out quickly:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then the wind came and blew away his hat; and off it flew a great way,
over the hills and far away, so that he had to run after it; and when
he came back she had bound up her hair again, and all was safe. So they
watched the geese till it grew dark.

In the evening, after they came home, Curdken went to the old king, and
said, ‘I cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any
longer.’ ‘Why?’ said the king. ‘Because, instead of doing any good, she
does nothing but tease me all day long.’ Then the king made him tell him
what had happened. And Curdken said, ‘When we go in the morning through
the dark gate with our flock of geese, she cries and talks with the head
of a horse that hangs upon the wall, and says:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answers:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow
where the geese fed; how his hat was blown away; and how he was forced
to run after it, and to leave his flock of geese to themselves. But the
old king told the boy to go out again the next day: and when morning
came, he placed himself behind the dark gate, and heard how she spoke
to Falada, and how Falada answered. Then he went into the field, and
hid himself in a bush by the meadow’s side; and he soon saw with his own
eyes how they drove the flock of geese; and how, after a little time,
she let down her hair that glittered in the sun. And then he heard her
say:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

And soon came a gale of wind, and carried away Curdken’s hat, and away
went Curdken after it, while the girl went on combing and curling her
hair. All this the old king saw: so he went home without being seen; and
when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside,
and asked her why she did so: but she burst into tears, and said, ‘That
I must not tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life.’

But the old king begged so hard, that she had no peace till she had told
him all the tale, from beginning to end, word for word. And it was very
lucky for her that she did so, for when she had done the king ordered
royal clothes to be put upon her, and gazed on her with wonder, she was
so beautiful. Then he called his son and told him that he had only a
false bride; for that she was merely a waiting-maid, while the true
bride stood by. And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and
heard how meek and patient she had been; and without saying anything to
the false bride, the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all
his court. The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one
side, and the true one on the other; but nobody knew her again, for her
beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes; and she did not seem at all
like the little goose-girl, now that she had her brilliant dress on.

When they had eaten and drank, and were very merry, the old king said
he would tell them a tale. So he began, and told all the story of the
princess, as if it was one that he had once heard; and he asked the
true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would
behave thus. ‘Nothing better,’ said this false bride, ‘than that she
should be thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails, and that
two white horses should be put to it, and should drag it from street to
street till she was dead.’ ‘Thou art she!’ said the old king; ‘and as
thou has judged thyself, so shall it be done to thee.’ And the young
king was then married to his true wife, and they reigned over the
kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives; and the good fairy came
to see them, and restored the faithful Falada to life again.




THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET


1. HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS

‘The nuts are quite ripe now,’ said Chanticleer to his wife Partlet,
‘suppose we go together to the mountains, and eat as many as we can,
before the squirrel takes them all away.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
Partlet, ‘let us go and make a holiday of it together.’

So they went to the mountains; and as it was a lovely day, they stayed
there till the evening. Now, whether it was that they had eaten so many
nuts that they could not walk, or whether they were lazy and would not,
I do not know: however, they took it into their heads that it did not
become them to go home on foot. So Chanticleer began to build a little
carriage of nutshells: and when it was finished, Partlet jumped into
it and sat down, and bid Chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her
home. ‘That’s a good joke!’ said Chanticleer; ‘no, that will never do;
I had rather by half walk home; I’ll sit on the box and be coachman,
if you like, but I’ll not draw.’ While this was passing, a duck came
quacking up and cried out, ‘You thieving vagabonds, what business have
you in my grounds? I’ll give it you well for your insolence!’ and upon
that she fell upon Chanticleer most lustily. But Chanticleer was no
coward, and returned the duck’s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely
that she soon began to cry out for mercy; which was only granted her
upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them. This she
agreed to do; and Chanticleer got upon the box, and drove, crying, ‘Now,
duck, get on as fast as you can.’ And away they went at a pretty good
pace.

After they had travelled along a little way, they met a needle and a pin
walking together along the road: and the needle cried out, ‘Stop, stop!’
and said it was so dark that they could hardly find their way, and such
dirty walking they could not get on at all: he told them that he and his
friend, the pin, had been at a public-house a few miles off, and had sat
drinking till they had forgotten how late it was; he begged therefore
that the travellers would be so kind as to give them a lift in their
carriage. Chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows, and not
likely to take up much room, told them they might ride, but made them
promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in, nor to
tread on Partlet’s toes.

Late at night they arrived at an inn; and as it was bad travelling in
the dark, and the duck seemed much tired, and waddled about a good
deal from one side to the other, they made up their minds to fix their
quarters there: but the landlord at first was unwilling, and said his
house was full, thinking they might not be very respectable company:
however, they spoke civilly to him, and gave him the egg which Partlet
had laid by the way, and said they would give him the duck, who was in
the habit of laying one every day: so at last he let them come in, and
they bespoke a handsome supper, and spent the evening very jollily.

Early in the morning, before it was quite light, and when nobody was
stirring in the inn, Chanticleer awakened his wife, and, fetching the
egg, they pecked a hole in it, ate it up, and threw the shells into the
fireplace: they then went to the pin and needle, who were fast asleep,
and seizing them by the heads, stuck one into the landlord’s easy chair
and the other into his handkerchief; and, having done this, they crept
away as softly as possible. However, the duck, who slept in the open
air in the yard, heard them coming, and jumping into the brook which ran
close by the inn, soon swam out of their reach.

An hour or two afterwards the landlord got up, and took his handkerchief
to wipe his face, but the pin ran into him and pricked him: then he
walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire, but when he
stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes, and almost blinded him.
‘Bless me!’ said he, ‘all the world seems to have a design against my
head this morning’: and so saying, he threw himself sulkily into his
easy chair; but, oh dear! the needle ran into him; and this time the
pain was not in his head. He now flew into a very great passion, and,
suspecting the company who had come in the night before, he went to look
after them, but they were all off; so he swore that he never again
would take in such a troop of vagabonds, who ate a great deal, paid no
reckoning, and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks.


2. HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES

Another day, Chanticleer and Partlet wished to ride out together;
so Chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels, and
harnessed six mice to it; and then he and Partlet got into the carriage,
and away they drove. Soon afterwards a cat met them, and said, ‘Where
are you going?’ And Chanticleer replied,

 ‘All on our way
  A visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Then the cat said, ‘Take me with you,’ Chanticleer said, ‘With all my
heart: get up behind, and be sure you do not fall off.’

 ‘Take care of this handsome coach of mine,
  Nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine!
  Now, mice, be ready,
  And, wheels, run steady!
  For we are going a visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Soon after came up a millstone, an egg, a duck, and a pin; and
Chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with
them.

When they arrived at Mr Korbes’s house, he was not at home; so the mice
drew the carriage into the coach-house, Chanticleer and Partlet flew
upon a beam, the cat sat down in the fireplace, the duck got into
the washing cistern, the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow, the
millstone laid himself over the house door, and the egg rolled himself
up in the towel.

When Mr Korbes came home, he went to the fireplace to make a fire; but
the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes: so he ran to the kitchen to
wash himself; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face; and
when he tried to wipe himself, the egg broke to pieces in the towel all
over his face and eyes. Then he was very angry, and went without his
supper to bed; but when he laid his head on the pillow, the pin ran into
his cheek: at this he became quite furious, and, jumping up, would have
run out of the house; but when he came to the door, the millstone fell
down on his head, and killed him on the spot.


3. HOW PARTLET DIED AND WAS BURIED, AND HOW CHANTICLEER DIED OF GRIEF

Another day Chanticleer and Partlet agreed to go again to the mountains
to eat nuts; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found
should be shared equally between them. Now Partlet found a very large
nut; but she said nothing about it to Chanticleer, and kept it all to
herself: however, it was so big that she could not swallow it, and it
stuck in her throat. Then she was in a great fright, and cried out to
Chanticleer, ‘Pray run as fast as you can, and fetch me some water, or I
shall be choked.’ Chanticleer ran as fast as he could to the river, and
said, ‘River, give me some water, for Partlet lies in the mountain, and
will be choked by a great nut.’ The river said, ‘Run first to the bride,
and ask her for a silken cord to draw up the water.’ Chanticleer ran to
the bride, and said, ‘Bride, you must give me a silken cord, for then
the river will give me water, and the water I will carry to Partlet, who
lies on the mountain, and will be choked by a great nut.’ But the bride
said, ‘Run first, and bring me my garland that is hanging on a willow
in the garden.’ Then Chanticleer ran to the garden, and took the garland
from the bough where it hung, and brought it to the bride; and then
the bride gave him the silken cord, and he took the silken cord to
the river, and the river gave him water, and he carried the water to
Partlet; but in the meantime she was choked by the great nut, and lay
quite dead, and never moved any more.

Then Chanticleer was very sorry, and cried bitterly; and all the beasts
came and wept with him over poor Partlet. And six mice built a little
hearse to carry her to her grave; and when it was ready they harnessed
themselves before it, and Chanticleer drove them. On the way they
met the fox. ‘Where are you going, Chanticleer?’ said he. ‘To bury my
Partlet,’ said the other. ‘May I go with you?’ said the fox. ‘Yes; but
you must get up behind, or my horses will not be able to draw you.’ Then
the fox got up behind; and presently the wolf, the bear, the goat, and
all the beasts of the wood, came and climbed upon the hearse.

So on they went till they came to a rapid stream. ‘How shall we get
over?’ said Chanticleer. Then said a straw, ‘I will lay myself across,
and you may pass over upon me.’ But as the mice were going over, the
straw slipped away and fell into the water, and the six mice all fell in
and were drowned. What was to be done? Then a large log of wood came
and said, ‘I am big enough; I will lay myself across the stream, and you
shall pass over upon me.’ So he laid himself down; but they managed
so clumsily, that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the
stream. Then a stone, who saw what had happened, came up and kindly
offered to help poor Chanticleer by laying himself across the stream;
and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse, and
managed to get Partlet out of it; but the fox and the other mourners,
who were sitting behind, were too heavy, and fell back into the water
and were all carried away by the stream and drowned.

Thus Chanticleer was left alone with his dead Partlet; and having dug
a grave for her, he laid her in it, and made a little hillock over her.
Then he sat down by the grave, and wept and mourned, till at last he
died too; and so all were dead.




RAPUNZEL

There were once a man and a woman who had long in vain wished for a
child. At length the woman hoped that God was about to grant her desire.
These people had a little window at the back of their house from which
a splendid garden could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had
great power and was dreaded by all the world. One day the woman was
standing by this window and looking down into the garden, when she saw a
bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it
looked so fresh and green that she longed for it, she quite pined away,
and began to look pale and miserable. Then her husband was alarmed, and
asked: ‘What ails you, dear wife?’ ‘Ah,’ she replied, ‘if I can’t eat
some of the rampion, which is in the garden behind our house, I shall
die.’ The man, who loved her, thought: ‘Sooner than let your wife die,
bring her some of the rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.’
At twilight, he clambered down over the wall into the garden of the
enchantress, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his
wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily. It
tasted so good to her--so very good, that the next day she longed for it
three times as much as before. If he was to have any rest, her husband
must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom of evening
therefore, he let himself down again; but when he had clambered down the
wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the enchantress standing before
him. ‘How can you dare,’ said she with angry look, ‘descend into my
garden and steal my rampion like a thief? You shall suffer for it!’
‘Ah,’ answered he, ‘let mercy take the place of justice, I only made
up my mind to do it out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the
window, and felt such a longing for it that she would have died if she
had not got some to eat.’ Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be
softened, and said to him: ‘If the case be as you say, I will allow
you to take away with you as much rampion as you will, only I make one
condition, you must give me the child which your wife will bring into
the world; it shall be well treated, and I will care for it like a
mother.’ The man in his terror consented to everything, and when the
woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once, gave the
child the name of Rapunzel, and took it away with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was
twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a tower, which lay in
a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but quite at the top was a
little window. When the enchantress wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath it and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses,
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above, and then the hair
fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the king’s son rode through
the forest and passed by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in her
solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound. The king’s
son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of the tower,
but none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had so deeply
touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and
listened to it. Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw
that an enchantress came there, and he heard how she cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the enchantress
climbed up to her. ‘If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I too
will try my fortune,’ said he, and the next day when it began to grow
dark, he went to the tower and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Immediately the hair fell down and the king’s son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes
had never yet beheld, came to her; but the king’s son began to talk to
her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so stirred
that it had let him have no rest, and he had been forced to see her.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take
him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought: ‘He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does’; and she said
yes, and laid her hand in his. She said: ‘I will willingly go away with
you, but I do not know how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk
every time that you come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when
that is ready I will descend, and you will take me on your horse.’ They
agreed that until that time he should come to her every evening, for the
old woman came by day. The enchantress remarked nothing of this, until
once Rapunzel said to her: ‘Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens that
you are so much heavier for me to draw up than the young king’s son--he
is with me in a moment.’ ‘Ah! you wicked child,’ cried the enchantress.
‘What do I hear you say! I thought I had separated you from all
the world, and yet you have deceived me!’ In her anger she clutched
Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand,
seized a pair of scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut
off, and the lovely braids lay on the ground. And she was so pitiless
that she took poor Rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great
grief and misery.

On the same day that she cast out Rapunzel, however, the enchantress
fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, to the hook of the
window, and when the king’s son came and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

she let the hair down. The king’s son ascended, but instead of finding
his dearest Rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazed at him with
wicked and venomous looks. ‘Aha!’ she cried mockingly, ‘you would fetch
your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest;
the cat has got it, and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is
lost to you; you will never see her again.’ The king’s son was beside
himself with pain, and in his despair he leapt down from the tower. He
escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his
eyes. Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but
roots and berries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of
his dearest wife. Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at
length came to the desert where Rapunzel, with the twins to which she
had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness. He heard a
voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it, and
when he approached, Rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept. Two
of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again, and he could
see with them as before. He led her to his kingdom where he was
joyfully received, and they lived for a long time afterwards, happy and
contented.




FUNDEVOGEL

There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt, and as
he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were
there. He followed the sound, and at last came to a high tree, and at
the top of this a little child was sitting, for the mother had fallen
asleep under the tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen it in
her arms, had flown down, snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.

The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought to himself:
‘You will take him home with you, and bring him up with your Lina.’ He
took it home, therefore, and the two children grew up together. And the
one, which he had found on a tree was called Fundevogel, because a bird
had carried it away. Fundevogel and Lina loved each other so dearly that
when they did not see each other they were sad.

Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails and
began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times, out
to the spring. Lina saw this and said, ‘Listen, old Sanna, why are you
fetching so much water?’ ‘If you will never repeat it to anyone, I will
tell you why.’ So Lina said, no, she would never repeat it to anyone,
and then the cook said: ‘Early tomorrow morning, when the forester
is out hunting, I will heat the water, and when it is boiling in the
kettle, I will throw in Fundevogel, and will boil him in it.’

Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, and when he
was gone the children were still in bed. Then Lina said to Fundevogel:
‘If you will never leave me, I too will never leave you.’ Fundevogel
said: ‘Neither now, nor ever will I leave you.’ Then said Lina: ‘Then
will I tell you. Last night, old Sanna carried so many buckets of water
into the house that I asked her why she was doing that, and she said
that if I would promise not to tell anyone, and she said that early
tomorrow morning when father was out hunting, she would set the kettle
full of water, throw you into it and boil you; but we will get up
quickly, dress ourselves, and go away together.’

The two children therefore got up, dressed themselves quickly, and went
away. When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook went into the
bedroom to fetch Fundevogel and throw him into it. But when she came in,
and went to the beds, both the children were gone. Then she was terribly
alarmed, and she said to herself: ‘What shall I say now when the
forester comes home and sees that the children are gone? They must be
followed instantly to get them back again.’

Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and
overtake the children. The children, however, were sitting outside the
forest, and when they saw from afar the three servants running, Lina
said to Fundevogel: ‘Never leave me, and I will never leave you.’
Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’ Then said Lina: ‘Do you become
a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.’ When the three servants came to
the forest, nothing was there but a rose-tree and one rose on it, but
the children were nowhere. Then said they: ‘There is nothing to be done
here,’ and they went home and told the cook that they had seen nothing
in the forest but a little rose-bush with one rose on it. Then the
old cook scolded and said: ‘You simpletons, you should have cut the
rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought it home with
you; go, and do it at once.’ They had therefore to go out and look for
the second time. The children, however, saw them coming from a distance.
Then Lina said: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.’ Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now; nor ever.’ Said Lina: ‘Then do you
become a church, and I’ll be the chandelier in it.’ So when the three
servants came, nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in
it. They said therefore to each other: ‘What can we do here, let us go
home.’ When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them;
so they said no, they had found nothing but a church, and there was a
chandelier in it. And the cook scolded them and said: ‘You fools! why
did you not pull the church to pieces, and bring the chandelier home
with you?’ And now the old cook herself got on her legs, and went with
the three servants in pursuit of the children. The children, however,
saw from afar that the three servants were coming, and the cook waddling
after them. Then said Lina: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will
never leave you.’ Then said Fundevogel: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’
Said Lina: ‘Be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.’ The cook,
however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay down by it,
and was about to drink it up. But the duck swam quickly to her, seized
her head in its beak and drew her into the water, and there the old
witch had to drown. Then the children went home together, and were
heartily delighted, and if they have not died, they are living still.




THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR

One summer’s morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the
window; he was in good spirits, and sewed with all his might. Then came
a peasant woman down the street crying: ‘Good jams, cheap! Good jams,
cheap!’ This rang pleasantly in the tailor’s ears; he stretched his
delicate head out of the window, and called: ‘Come up here, dear woman;
here you will get rid of your goods.’ The woman came up the three steps
to the tailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the pots
for him. He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it, and
at length said: ‘The jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me out four
ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no
consequence.’ The woman who had hoped to find a good sale, gave him
what he desired, but went away quite angry and grumbling. ‘Now, this jam
shall be blessed by God,’ cried the little tailor, ‘and give me health
and strength’; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself
a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it. ‘This won’t
taste bitter,’ said he, ‘but I will just finish the jacket before I
take a bite.’ He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made
bigger and bigger stitches. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and they were
attracted and descended on it in hosts. ‘Hi! who invited you?’ said the
little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away. The flies, however,
who understood no German, would not be turned away, but came back
again in ever-increasing companies. The little tailor at last lost all
patience, and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table,
and saying: ‘Wait, and I will give it to you,’ struck it mercilessly on
them. When he drew it away and counted, there lay before him no fewer
than seven, dead and with legs stretched out. ‘Are you a fellow of that
sort?’ said he, and could not help admiring his own bravery. ‘The whole
town shall know of this!’ And the little tailor hastened to cut himself
a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered on it in large letters: ‘Seven at
one stroke!’ ‘What, the town!’ he continued, ‘the whole world shall hear
of it!’ and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb’s tail. The tailor
put on the girdle, and resolved to go forth into the world, because he
thought his workshop was too small for his valour. Before he went away,
he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could
take with him; however, he found nothing but an old cheese, and that
he put in his pocket. In front of the door he observed a bird which
had caught itself in the thicket. It had to go into his pocket with the
cheese. Now he took to the road boldly, and as he was light and nimble,
he felt no fatigue. The road led him up a mountain, and when he had
reached the highest point of it, there sat a powerful giant looking
peacefully about him. The little tailor went bravely up, spoke to him,
and said: ‘Good day, comrade, so you are sitting there overlooking the
wide-spread world! I am just on my way thither, and want to try my luck.
Have you any inclination to go with me?’ The giant looked contemptuously
at the tailor, and said: ‘You ragamuffin! You miserable creature!’

‘Oh, indeed?’ answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat, and
showed the giant the girdle, ‘there may you read what kind of a man I
am!’ The giant read: ‘Seven at one stroke,’ and thought that they had
been men whom the tailor had killed, and began to feel a little respect
for the tiny fellow. Nevertheless, he wished to try him first, and took
a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out
of it. ‘Do that likewise,’ said the giant, ‘if you have strength.’ ‘Is
that all?’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play with us!’ and put his
hand into his pocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until
the liquid ran out of it. ‘Faith,’ said he, ‘that was a little better,
wasn’t it?’ The giant did not know what to say, and could not believe it
of the little man. Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high
that the eye could scarcely follow it. ‘Now, little mite of a man, do
that likewise,’ ‘Well thrown,’ said the tailor, ‘but after all the stone
came down to earth again; I will throw you one which shall never come
back at all,’ and he put his hand into his pocket, took out the bird,
and threw it into the air. The bird, delighted with its liberty,
rose, flew away and did not come back. ‘How does that shot please you,
comrade?’ asked the tailor. ‘You can certainly throw,’ said the giant,
‘but now we will see if you are able to carry anything properly.’ He
took the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on
the ground, and said: ‘If you are strong enough, help me to carry the
tree out of the forest.’ ‘Readily,’ answered the little man; ‘take you
the trunk on your shoulders, and I will raise up the branches and twigs;
after all, they are the heaviest.’ The giant took the trunk on his
shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant, who
could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree, and the little
tailor into the bargain: he behind, was quite merry and happy, and
whistled the song: ‘Three tailors rode forth from the gate,’ as if
carrying the tree were child’s play. The giant, after he had dragged the
heavy burden part of the way, could go no further, and cried: ‘Hark
you, I shall have to let the tree fall!’ The tailor sprang nimbly down,
seized the tree with both arms as if he had been carrying it, and said
to the giant: ‘You are such a great fellow, and yet cannot even carry
the tree!’

They went on together, and as they passed a cherry-tree, the giant laid
hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging, bent it
down, gave it into the tailor’s hand, and bade him eat. But the little
tailor was much too weak to hold the tree, and when the giant let it go,
it sprang back again, and the tailor was tossed into the air with it.
When he had fallen down again without injury, the giant said: ‘What is
this? Have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig?’ ‘There is no
lack of strength,’ answered the little tailor. ‘Do you think that could
be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow? I leapt over
the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.
Jump as I did, if you can do it.’ The giant made the attempt but he
could not get over the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so
that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand.

The giant said: ‘If you are such a valiant fellow, come with me into our
cavern and spend the night with us.’ The little tailor was willing, and
followed him. When they went into the cave, other giants were sitting
there by the fire, and each of them had a roasted sheep in his hand and
was eating it. The little tailor looked round and thought: ‘It is much
more spacious here than in my workshop.’ The giant showed him a bed, and
said he was to lie down in it and sleep. The bed, however, was too
big for the little tailor; he did not lie down in it, but crept into
a corner. When it was midnight, and the giant thought that the little
tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a great iron bar,
cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he had finished off the
grasshopper for good. With the earliest dawn the giants went into the
forest, and had quite forgotten the little tailor, when all at once he
walked up to them quite merrily and boldly. The giants were terrified,
they were afraid that he would strike them all dead, and ran away in a
great hurry.

The little tailor went onwards, always following his own pointed nose.
After he had walked for a long time, he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
Whilst he lay there, the people came and inspected him on all sides, and
read on his girdle: ‘Seven at one stroke.’ ‘Ah!’ said they, ‘what does
the great warrior want here in the midst of peace? He must be a mighty
lord.’ They went and announced him to the king, and gave it as their
opinion that if war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful
man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart. The counsel pleased
the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer
him military service when he awoke. The ambassador remained standing by
the sleeper, waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes,
and then conveyed to him this proposal. ‘For this very reason have
I come here,’ the tailor replied, ‘I am ready to enter the king’s
service.’ He was therefore honourably received, and a special dwelling
was assigned him.

The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and wished
him a thousand miles away. ‘What is to be the end of this?’ they said
among themselves. ‘If we quarrel with him, and he strikes about him,
seven of us will fall at every blow; not one of us can stand against
him.’ They came therefore to a decision, betook themselves in a body to
the king, and begged for their dismissal. ‘We are not prepared,’ said
they, ‘to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke.’ The king was
sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants,
wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly
have been rid of him again. But he did not venture to give him his
dismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people
dead, and place himself on the royal throne. He thought about it for a
long time, and at last found good counsel. He sent to the little tailor
and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior, he had one
request to make to him. In a forest of his country lived two giants,
who caused great mischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging,
and burning, and no one could approach them without putting himself in
danger of death. If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants, he
would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of his kingdom as a
dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him.
‘That would indeed be a fine thing for a man like me!’ thought the
little tailor. ‘One is not offered a beautiful princess and half a
kingdom every day of one’s life!’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will soon
subdue the giants, and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen
to do it; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of
two.’

The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed him.
When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said to his followers:
‘Just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finish off the giants.’ Then
he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left. After a
while he perceived both giants. They lay sleeping under a tree, and
snored so that the branches waved up and down. The little tailor, not
idle, gathered two pocketsful of stones, and with these climbed up the
tree. When he was halfway up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat
just above the sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on
the breast of one of the giants. For a long time the giant felt nothing,
but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said: ‘Why are you
knocking me?’ ‘You must be dreaming,’ said the other, ‘I am not knocking
you.’ They laid themselves down to sleep again, and then the tailor
threw a stone down on the second. ‘What is the meaning of this?’ cried
the other ‘Why are you pelting me?’ ‘I am not pelting you,’ answered
the first, growling. They disputed about it for a time, but as they were
weary they let the matter rest, and their eyes closed once more. The
little tailor began his game again, picked out the biggest stone, and
threw it with all his might on the breast of the first giant. ‘That
is too bad!’ cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed his
companion against the tree until it shook. The other paid him back in
the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and
belaboured each other so long, that at last they both fell down dead on
the ground at the same time. Then the little tailor leapt down. ‘It is
a lucky thing,’ said he, ‘that they did not tear up the tree on which
I was sitting, or I should have had to sprint on to another like a
squirrel; but we tailors are nimble.’ He drew out his sword and gave
each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the
horsemen and said: ‘The work is done; I have finished both of them
off, but it was hard work! They tore up trees in their sore need, and
defended themselves with them, but all that is to no purpose when a man
like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.’ ‘But are you not
wounded?’ asked the horsemen. ‘You need not concern yourself about
that,’ answered the tailor, ‘they have not bent one hair of mine.’ The
horsemen would not believe him, and rode into the forest; there they
found the giants swimming in their blood, and all round about lay the
torn-up trees.

The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward; he, however,
repented of his promise, and again bethought himself how he could get
rid of the hero. ‘Before you receive my daughter, and the half of my
kingdom,’ said he to him, ‘you must perform one more heroic deed. In
the forest roams a unicorn which does great harm, and you must catch
it first.’ ‘I fear one unicorn still less than two giants. Seven at one
blow, is my kind of affair.’ He took a rope and an axe with him, went
forth into the forest, and again bade those who were sent with him to
wait outside. He had not long to seek. The unicorn soon came towards
him, and rushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with its
horn without more ado. ‘Softly, softly; it can’t be done as quickly as
that,’ said he, and stood still and waited until the animal was quite
close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree. The unicorn ran against
the tree with all its strength, and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk
that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again, and thus it
was caught. ‘Now, I have got the bird,’ said the tailor, and came out
from behind the tree and put the rope round its neck, and then with his
axe he hewed the horn out of the tree, and when all was ready he led the
beast away and took it to the king.

The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made a third
demand. Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that
made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmen should give him their
help. ‘Willingly,’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play!’ He did not
take the huntsmen with him into the forest, and they were well pleased
that he did not, for the wild boar had several times received them in
such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him. When
the boar perceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth and
whetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but the hero
fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at
once, and in one bound out again. The boar ran after him, but the tailor
ran round outside and shut the door behind it, and then the raging
beast, which was much too heavy and awkward to leap out of the window,
was caught. The little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they
might see the prisoner with their own eyes. The hero, however, went to
the king, who was now, whether he liked it or not, obliged to keep his
promise, and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom. Had he known
that it was no warlike hero, but a little tailor who was standing before
him, it would have gone to his heart still more than it did. The wedding
was held with great magnificence and small joy, and out of a tailor a
king was made.

After some time the young queen heard her husband say in his dreams at
night: ‘Boy, make me the doublet, and patch the pantaloons, or else I
will rap the yard-measure over your ears.’ Then she discovered in what
state of life the young lord had been born, and next morning complained
of her wrongs to her father, and begged him to help her to get rid of
her husband, who was nothing else but a tailor. The king comforted her
and said: ‘Leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants
shall stand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bind
him, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide
world.’ The woman was satisfied with this; but the king’s armour-bearer,
who had heard all, was friendly with the young lord, and informed him of
the whole plot. ‘I’ll put a screw into that business,’ said the little
tailor. At night he went to bed with his wife at the usual time, and
when she thought that he had fallen asleep, she got up, opened the door,
and then lay down again. The little tailor, who was only pretending to
be asleep, began to cry out in a clear voice: ‘Boy, make me the doublet
and patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure over your
ears. I smote seven at one blow. I killed two giants, I brought away one
unicorn, and caught a wild boar, and am I to fear those who are standing
outside the room.’ When these men heard the tailor speaking thus, they
were overcome by a great dread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were
behind them, and none of them would venture anything further against
him. So the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his
life.




HANSEL AND GRETEL

Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his
two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had
little to bite and to break, and once when great dearth fell on the
land, he could no longer procure even daily bread. Now when he thought
over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety, he
groaned and said to his wife: ‘What is to become of us? How are we
to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything even for
ourselves?’ ‘I’ll tell you what, husband,’ answered the woman, ‘early
tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where
it is the thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each
of them one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work and
leave them alone. They will not find the way home again, and we shall be
rid of them.’ ‘No, wife,’ said the man, ‘I will not do that; how can I
bear to leave my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would
soon come and tear them to pieces.’ ‘O, you fool!’ said she, ‘then we
must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane the planks for our
coffins,’ and she left him no peace until he consented. ‘But I feel very
sorry for the poor children, all the same,’ said the man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what their stepmother had said to their father. Gretel wept
bitter tears, and said to Hansel: ‘Now all is over with us.’ ‘Be quiet,
Gretel,’ said Hansel, ‘do not distress yourself, I will soon find a way
to help us.’ And when the old folks had fallen asleep, he got up, put
on his little coat, opened the door below, and crept outside. The moon
shone brightly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house
glittered like real silver pennies. Hansel stooped and stuffed the
little pocket of his coat with as many as he could get in. Then he went
back and said to Gretel: ‘Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in
peace, God will not forsake us,’ and he lay down again in his bed. When
day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the
two children, saying: ‘Get up, you sluggards! we are going into the
forest to fetch wood.’ She gave each a little piece of bread, and said:
‘There is something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then,
for you will get nothing else.’ Gretel took the bread under her apron,
as Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket. Then they all set out together
on the way to the forest. When they had walked a short time, Hansel
stood still and peeped back at the house, and did so again and again.
His father said: ‘Hansel, what are you looking at there and staying
behind for? Pay attention, and do not forget how to use your legs.’ ‘Ah,
father,’ said Hansel, ‘I am looking at my little white cat, which is
sitting up on the roof, and wants to say goodbye to me.’ The wife said:
‘Fool, that is not your little cat, that is the morning sun which is
shining on the chimneys.’ Hansel, however, had not been looking back at
the cat, but had been constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones
out of his pocket on the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said: ‘Now,
children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you may not
be cold.’ Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together, as high as a
little hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning
very high, the woman said: ‘Now, children, lay yourselves down by the
fire and rest, we will go into the forest and cut some wood. When we
have done, we will come back and fetch you away.’

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a little
piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they
believed that their father was near. It was not the axe, however, but
a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was
blowing backwards and forwards. And as they had been sitting such a long
time, their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When
at last they awoke, it was already dark night. Gretel began to cry and
said: ‘How are we to get out of the forest now?’ But Hansel comforted
her and said: ‘Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, and then we
will soon find the way.’ And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took
his little sister by the hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like
newly-coined silver pieces, and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day came once more
to their father’s house. They knocked at the door, and when the woman
opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said: ‘You naughty
children, why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought you were
never coming back at all!’ The father, however, rejoiced, for it had cut
him to the heart to leave them behind alone.

Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughout the
land, and the children heard their mother saying at night to their
father: ‘Everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left, and that
is the end. The children must go, we will take them farther into the
wood, so that they will not find their way out again; there is no other
means of saving ourselves!’ The man’s heart was heavy, and he thought:
‘It would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your
children.’ The woman, however, would listen to nothing that he had to
say, but scolded and reproached him. He who says A must say B, likewise,
and as he had yielded the first time, he had to do so a second time
also.

The children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation.
When the old folks were asleep, Hansel again got up, and wanted to go
out and pick up pebbles as he had done before, but the woman had locked
the door, and Hansel could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted his
little sister, and said: ‘Do not cry, Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the
good God will help us.’

Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of their
beds. Their piece of bread was given to them, but it was still smaller
than the time before. On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his
in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground.
‘Hansel, why do you stop and look round?’ said the father, ‘go on.’ ‘I
am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof, and
wants to say goodbye to me,’ answered Hansel. ‘Fool!’ said the woman,
‘that is not your little pigeon, that is the morning sun that is shining
on the chimney.’ Hansel, however little by little, threw all the crumbs
on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had
never in their lives been before. Then a great fire was again made, and
the mother said: ‘Just sit there, you children, and when you are tired
you may sleep a little; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in
the evening when we are done, we will come and fetch you away.’ When
it was noon, Gretel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had
scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep and evening passed, but
no one came to the poor children. They did not awake until it was dark
night, and Hansel comforted his little sister and said: ‘Just wait,
Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread
which I have strewn about, they will show us our way home again.’ When
the moon came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many
thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked
them all up. Hansel said to Gretel: ‘We shall soon find the way,’ but
they did not find it. They walked the whole night and all the next day
too from morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest,
and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or three
berries, which grew on the ground. And as they were so weary that their
legs would carry them no longer, they lay down beneath a tree and fell
asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house. They
began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the forest, and if
help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness. When it
was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough,
which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it. And
when its song was over, it spread its wings and flew away before them,
and they followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof of
which it alighted; and when they approached the little house they saw
that it was built of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows
were of clear sugar. ‘We will set to work on that,’ said Hansel, ‘and
have a good meal. I will eat a bit of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat
some of the window, it will taste sweet.’ Hansel reached up above, and
broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretel leant
against the window and nibbled at the panes. Then a soft voice cried
from the parlour:

 ‘Nibble, nibble, gnaw,
  Who is nibbling at my little house?’

The children answered:

 ‘The wind, the wind,
  The heaven-born wind,’

and went on eating without disturbing themselves. Hansel, who liked the
taste of the roof, tore down a great piece of it, and Gretel pushed out
the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, and enjoyed herself with
it. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman as old as the hills, who
supported herself on crutches, came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were
so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their
hands. The old woman, however, nodded her head, and said: ‘Oh, you dear
children, who has brought you here? do come in, and stay with me. No
harm shall happen to you.’ She took them both by the hand, and led them
into her little house. Then good food was set before them, milk and
pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts. Afterwards two pretty little
beds were covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down
in them, and thought they were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind; she was in reality
a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built the
little house of bread in order to entice them there. When a child fell
into her power, she killed it, cooked and ate it, and that was a feast
day with her. Witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but they have
a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware when human beings draw near.
When Hansel and Gretel came into her neighbourhood, she laughed with
malice, and said mockingly: ‘I have them, they shall not escape me
again!’ Early in the morning before the children were awake, she was
already up, and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so
pretty, with their plump and rosy cheeks she muttered to herself: ‘That
will be a dainty mouthful!’ Then she seized Hansel with her shrivelled
hand, carried him into a little stable, and locked him in behind a
grated door. Scream as he might, it would not help him. Then she went to
Gretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried: ‘Get up, lazy thing, fetch
some water, and cook something good for your brother, he is in the
stable outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I will eat him.’
Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in vain, for she was
forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Gretel got nothing
but crab-shells. Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and
cried: ‘Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may feel if you will soon
be fat.’ Hansel, however, stretched out a little bone to her, and
the old woman, who had dim eyes, could not see it, and thought it was
Hansel’s finger, and was astonished that there was no way of fattening
him. When four weeks had gone by, and Hansel still remained thin, she
was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer. ‘Now, then,
Gretel,’ she cried to the girl, ‘stir yourself, and bring some water.
Let Hansel be fat or lean, tomorrow I will kill him, and cook him.’ Ah,
how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water,
and how her tears did flow down her cheeks! ‘Dear God, do help us,’ she
cried. ‘If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, we should
at any rate have died together.’ ‘Just keep your noise to yourself,’
said the old woman, ‘it won’t help you at all.’

Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with
the water, and light the fire. ‘We will bake first,’ said the old woman,
‘I have already heated the oven, and kneaded the dough.’ She pushed poor
Gretel out to the oven, from which flames of fire were already darting.
‘Creep in,’ said the witch, ‘and see if it is properly heated, so that
we can put the bread in.’ And once Gretel was inside, she intended to
shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.
But Gretel saw what she had in mind, and said: ‘I do not know how I am
to do it; how do I get in?’ ‘Silly goose,’ said the old woman. ‘The door
is big enough; just look, I can get in myself!’ and she crept up and
thrust her head into the oven. Then Gretel gave her a push that drove
her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened the bolt. Oh! then
she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ran away and the godless
witch was miserably burnt to death.

Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable,
and cried: ‘Hansel, we are saved! The old witch is dead!’ Then Hansel
sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened. How they did
rejoice and embrace each other, and dance about and kiss each other! And
as they had no longer any need to fear her, they went into the witch’s
house, and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.
‘These are far better than pebbles!’ said Hansel, and thrust into his
pockets whatever could be got in, and Gretel said: ‘I, too, will take
something home with me,’ and filled her pinafore full. ‘But now we must
be off,’ said Hansel, ‘that we may get out of the witch’s forest.’

When they had walked for two hours, they came to a great stretch of
water. ‘We cannot cross,’ said Hansel, ‘I see no foot-plank, and no
bridge.’ ‘And there is also no ferry,’ answered Gretel, ‘but a white
duck is swimming there: if I ask her, she will help us over.’ Then she
cried:

 ‘Little duck, little duck, dost thou see,
  Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee?
  There’s never a plank, or bridge in sight,
  Take us across on thy back so white.’

The duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself on its back, and told
his sister to sit by him. ‘No,’ replied Gretel, ‘that will be too heavy
for the little duck; she shall take us across, one after the other.’ The
good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and had
walked for a short time, the forest seemed to be more and more familiar
to them, and at length they saw from afar their father’s house. Then
they began to run, rushed into the parlour, and threw themselves round
their father’s neck. The man had not known one happy hour since he had
left the children in the forest; the woman, however, was dead. Gretel
emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the
room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to
add to them. Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together
in perfect happiness. My tale is done, there runs a mouse; whosoever
catches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.




THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE

Once upon a time, a mouse, a bird, and a sausage, entered into
partnership and set up house together. For a long time all went well;
they lived in great comfort, and prospered so far as to be able to add
considerably to their stores. The bird’s duty was to fly daily into the
wood and bring in fuel; the mouse fetched the water, and the sausage saw
to the cooking.

When people are too well off they always begin to long for something
new. And so it came to pass, that the bird, while out one day, met a
fellow bird, to whom he boastfully expatiated on the excellence of his
household arrangements. But the other bird sneered at him for being a
poor simpleton, who did all the hard work, while the other two stayed
at home and had a good time of it. For, when the mouse had made the fire
and fetched in the water, she could retire into her little room and rest
until it was time to set the table. The sausage had only to watch the
pot to see that the food was properly cooked, and when it was near
dinner-time, he just threw himself into the broth, or rolled in and out
among the vegetables three or four times, and there they were, buttered,
and salted, and ready to be served. Then, when the bird came home and
had laid aside his burden, they sat down to table, and when they had
finished their meal, they could sleep their fill till the following
morning: and that was really a very delightful life.

Influenced by those remarks, the bird next morning refused to bring in
the wood, telling the others that he had been their servant long enough,
and had been a fool into the bargain, and that it was now time to make a
change, and to try some other way of arranging the work. Beg and pray
as the mouse and the sausage might, it was of no use; the bird remained
master of the situation, and the venture had to be made. They therefore
drew lots, and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood, to the mouse
to cook, and to the bird to fetch the water.

And now what happened? The sausage started in search of wood, the bird
made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two waited
till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day. But the
sausage remained so long away, that they became uneasy, and the bird
flew out to meet him. He had not flown far, however, when he came across
a dog who, having met the sausage, had regarded him as his legitimate
booty, and so seized and swallowed him. The bird complained to the dog
of this bare-faced robbery, but nothing he said was of any avail, for
the dog answered that he found false credentials on the sausage, and
that was the reason his life had been forfeited.

He picked up the wood, and flew sadly home, and told the mouse all he
had seen and heard. They were both very unhappy, but agreed to make the
best of things and to remain with one another.

So now the bird set the table, and the mouse looked after the food and,
wishing to prepare it in the same way as the sausage, by rolling in and
out among the vegetables to salt and butter them, she jumped into the
pot; but she stopped short long before she reached the bottom, having
already parted not only with her skin and hair, but also with life.

Presently the bird came in and wanted to serve up the dinner, but he
could nowhere see the cook. In his alarm and flurry, he threw the wood
here and there about the floor, called and searched, but no cook was to
be found. Then some of the wood that had been carelessly thrown down,
caught fire and began to blaze. The bird hastened to fetch some water,
but his pail fell into the well, and he after it, and as he was unable
to recover himself, he was drowned.




MOTHER HOLLE

Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters; one of them
was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. The mother,
however, loved the ugly and lazy one best, because she was her own
daughter, and so the other, who was only her stepdaughter, was made
to do all the work of the house, and was quite the Cinderella of the
family. Her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in
the high road, there to spin until she made her fingers bleed. Now it
chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle, and as the girl
stopped over the well to wash it off, the spindle suddenly sprang out
of her hand and fell into the well. She ran home crying to tell of her
misfortune, but her stepmother spoke harshly to her, and after giving
her a violent scolding, said unkindly, ‘As you have let the spindle fall
into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out.’

The girl went back to the well not knowing what to do, and at last in
her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle.

She remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a
beautiful meadow, full of sunshine, and with countless flowers blooming
in every direction.

She walked over the meadow, and presently she came upon a baker’s oven
full of bread, and the loaves cried out to her, ‘Take us out, take us
out, or alas! we shall be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long
ago.’ So she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out.

She went on a little farther, till she came to a tree full of apples.
‘Shake me, shake me, I pray,’ cried the tree; ‘my apples, one and all,
are ripe.’ So she shook the tree, and the apples came falling down upon
her like rain; but she continued shaking until there was not a single
apple left upon it. Then she carefully gathered the apples together in a
heap and walked on again.

The next thing she came to was a little house, and there she saw an old
woman looking out, with such large teeth, that she was terrified, and
turned to run away. But the old woman called after her, ‘What are you
afraid of, dear child? Stay with me; if you will do the work of my house
properly for me, I will make you very happy. You must be very careful,
however, to make my bed in the right way, for I wish you always to shake
it thoroughly, so that the feathers fly about; then they say, down there
in the world, that it is snowing; for I am Mother Holle.’ The old woman
spoke so kindly, that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter
into her service.

She took care to do everything according to the old woman’s bidding and
every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might, so that the
feathers flew about like so many snowflakes. The old woman was as good
as her word: she never spoke angrily to her, and gave her roast and
boiled meats every day.

So she stayed on with Mother Holle for some time, and then she began
to grow unhappy. She could not at first tell why she felt sad, but she
became conscious at last of great longing to go home; then she knew she
was homesick, although she was a thousand times better off with Mother
Holle than with her mother and sister. After waiting awhile, she went
to Mother Holle and said, ‘I am so homesick, that I cannot stay with
you any longer, for although I am so happy here, I must return to my own
people.’

Then Mother Holle said, ‘I am pleased that you should want to go back
to your own people, and as you have served me so well and faithfully, I
will take you home myself.’

Thereupon she led the girl by the hand up to a broad gateway. The gate
was opened, and as the girl passed through, a shower of gold fell upon
her, and the gold clung to her, so that she was covered with it from
head to foot.

‘That is a reward for your industry,’ said Mother Holle, and as she
spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well.

The gate was then closed, and the girl found herself back in the old
world close to her mother’s house. As she entered the courtyard, the
cock who was perched on the well, called out:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your golden daughter’s come back to you.’

Then she went in to her mother and sister, and as she was so richly
covered with gold, they gave her a warm welcome. She related to them
all that had happened, and when the mother heard how she had come by her
great riches, she thought she should like her ugly, lazy daughter to go
and try her fortune. So she made the sister go and sit by the well
and spin, and the girl pricked her finger and thrust her hand into a
thorn-bush, so that she might drop some blood on to the spindle; then
she threw it into the well, and jumped in herself.

Like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow, and walked over it
till she came to the oven. ‘Take us out, take us out, or alas! we shall
be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long ago,’ cried the loaves
as before. But the lazy girl answered, ‘Do you think I am going to dirty
my hands for you?’ and walked on.

Presently she came to the apple-tree. ‘Shake me, shake me, I pray; my
apples, one and all, are ripe,’ it cried. But she only answered, ‘A nice
thing to ask me to do, one of the apples might fall on my head,’ and
passed on.

At last she came to Mother Holle’s house, and as she had heard all about
the large teeth from her sister, she was not afraid of them, and engaged
herself without delay to the old woman.

The first day she was very obedient and industrious, and exerted herself
to please Mother Holle, for she thought of the gold she should get in
return. The next day, however, she began to dawdle over her work, and
the third day she was more idle still; then she began to lie in bed in
the mornings and refused to get up. Worse still, she neglected to
make the old woman’s bed properly, and forgot to shake it so that the
feathers might fly about. So Mother Holle very soon got tired of her,
and told her she might go. The lazy girl was delighted at this, and
thought to herself, ‘The gold will soon be mine.’ Mother Holle led her,
as she had led her sister, to the broad gateway; but as she was passing
through, instead of the shower of gold, a great bucketful of pitch came
pouring over her.

‘That is in return for your services,’ said the old woman, and she shut
the gate.

So the lazy girl had to go home covered with pitch, and the cock on the
well called out as she saw her:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your dirty daughter’s come back to you.’

But, try what she would, she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to
her as long as she lived.




LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]

Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone
who looked at her, but most of all by her grandmother, and there was
nothing that she would not have given to the child. Once she gave her a
little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would never
wear anything else; so she was always called ‘Little Red-Cap.’

One day her mother said to her: ‘Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece
of cake and a bottle of wine; take them to your grandmother, she is ill
and weak, and they will do her good. Set out before it gets hot, and
when you are going, walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path,
or you may fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will
get nothing; and when you go into her room, don’t forget to say, “Good
morning”, and don’t peep into every corner before you do it.’

‘I will take great care,’ said Little Red-Cap to her mother, and gave
her hand on it.

The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the village,
and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a wolf met her. Red-Cap
did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all afraid of
him.

‘Good day, Little Red-Cap,’ said he.

‘Thank you kindly, wolf.’

‘Whither away so early, Little Red-Cap?’

‘To my grandmother’s.’

‘What have you got in your apron?’

‘Cake and wine; yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick grandmother is to
have something good, to make her stronger.’

‘Where does your grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?’

‘A good quarter of a league farther on in the wood; her house stands
under the three large oak-trees, the nut-trees are just below; you
surely must know it,’ replied Little Red-Cap.

The wolf thought to himself: ‘What a tender young creature! what a nice
plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman. I must
act craftily, so as to catch both.’ So he walked for a short time by
the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he said: ‘See, Little Red-Cap, how
pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round? I believe,
too, that you do not hear how sweetly the little birds are singing; you
walk gravely along as if you were going to school, while everything else
out here in the wood is merry.’

Little Red-Cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams dancing
here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers growing everywhere,
she thought: ‘Suppose I take grandmother a fresh nosegay; that would
please her too. It is so early in the day that I shall still get there
in good time’; and so she ran from the path into the wood to look for
flowers. And whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a
still prettier one farther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and
deeper into the wood.

Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother’s house and knocked
at the door.

‘Who is there?’

‘Little Red-Cap,’ replied the wolf. ‘She is bringing cake and wine; open
the door.’

‘Lift the latch,’ called out the grandmother, ‘I am too weak, and cannot
get up.’

The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and without saying a
word he went straight to the grandmother’s bed, and devoured her. Then
he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed
and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers,
and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she
remembered her grandmother, and set out on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, and when she
went into the room, she had such a strange feeling that she said to
herself: ‘Oh dear! how uneasy I feel today, and at other times I like
being with grandmother so much.’ She called out: ‘Good morning,’ but
received no answer; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains.
There lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face, and
looking very strange.

‘Oh! grandmother,’ she said, ‘what big ears you have!’

‘The better to hear you with, my child,’ was the reply.

‘But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!’ she said.

‘The better to see you with, my dear.’

‘But, grandmother, what large hands you have!’

‘The better to hug you with.’

‘Oh! but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!’

‘The better to eat you with!’

And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he was out of
bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again in the bed,
fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himself: ‘How the old woman is snoring! I must
just see if she wants anything.’ So he went into the room, and when he
came to the bed, he saw that the wolf was lying in it. ‘Do I find you
here, you old sinner!’ said he. ‘I have long sought you!’ Then just as
he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have
devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, so he did
not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cut open the stomach
of the sleeping wolf. When he had made two snips, he saw the little
Red-Cap shining, and then he made two snips more, and the little girl
sprang out, crying: ‘Ah, how frightened I have been! How dark it was
inside the wolf’; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive
also, but scarcely able to breathe. Red-Cap, however, quickly fetched
great stones with which they filled the wolf’s belly, and when he awoke,
he wanted to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at
once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted. The huntsman drew off the wolf’s skin and
went home with it; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine which
Red-Cap had brought, and revived, but Red-Cap thought to herself: ‘As
long as I live, I will never by myself leave the path, to run into the
wood, when my mother has forbidden me to do so.’




It also related that once when Red-Cap was again taking cakes to the old
grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and tried to entice her from the
path. Red-Cap, however, was on her guard, and went straight forward on
her way, and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf, and that he
had said ‘good morning’ to her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes,
that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would
have eaten her up. ‘Well,’ said the grandmother, ‘we will shut the door,
that he may not come in.’ Soon afterwards the wolf knocked, and cried:
‘Open the door, grandmother, I am Little Red-Cap, and am bringing you
some cakes.’ But they did not speak, or open the door, so the grey-beard
stole twice or thrice round the house, and at last jumped on the roof,
intending to wait until Red-Cap went home in the evening, and then to
steal after her and devour her in the darkness. But the grandmother
saw what was in his thoughts. In front of the house was a great stone
trough, so she said to the child: ‘Take the pail, Red-Cap; I made some
sausages yesterday, so carry the water in which I boiled them to the
trough.’ Red-Cap carried until the great trough was quite full. Then the
smell of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peeped down,
and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep
his footing and began to slip, and slipped down from the roof straight
into the great trough, and was drowned. But Red-Cap went joyously home,
and no one ever did anything to harm her again.




THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM

There was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter, and as she was
grown up, he was anxious that she should be well married and provided
for. He said to himself, ‘I will give her to the first suitable man who
comes and asks for her hand.’ Not long after a suitor appeared, and as
he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with
which to find fault, he betrothed his daughter to him. But the girl did
not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband.
She did not feel that she could trust him, and she could not look at him
nor think of him without an inward shudder. One day he said to her, ‘You
have not yet paid me a visit, although we have been betrothed for some
time.’ ‘I do not know where your house is,’ she answered. ‘My house is
out there in the dark forest,’ he said. She tried to excuse herself by
saying that she would not be able to find the way thither. Her betrothed
only replied, ‘You must come and see me next Sunday; I have already
invited guests for that day, and that you may not mistake the way, I
will strew ashes along the path.’

When Sunday came, and it was time for the girl to start, a feeling of
dread came over her which she could not explain, and that she might
be able to find her path again, she filled her pockets with peas and
lentils to sprinkle on the ground as she went along. On reaching the
entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes, and these
she followed, throwing down some peas on either side of her at every
step she took. She walked the whole day until she came to the deepest,
darkest part of the forest. There she saw a lonely house, looking so
grim and mysterious, that it did not please her at all. She stepped
inside, but not a soul was to be seen, and a great silence reigned
throughout. Suddenly a voice cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a
cage on the wall. Again it cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl passed on, going from room to room of the house, but they were
all empty, and still she saw no one. At last she came to the cellar,
and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her head from
shaking. ‘Can you tell me,’ asked the girl, ‘if my betrothed husband
lives here?’

‘Ah, you poor child,’ answered the old woman, ‘what a place for you to
come to! This is a murderers’ den. You think yourself a promised bride,
and that your marriage will soon take place, but it is with death that
you will keep your marriage feast. Look, do you see that large cauldron
of water which I am obliged to keep on the fire! As soon as they have
you in their power they will kill you without mercy, and cook and eat
you, for they are eaters of men. If I did not take pity on you and save
you, you would be lost.’

Thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask, which quite hid her
from view. ‘Keep as still as a mouse,’ she said; ‘do not move or speak,
or it will be all over with you. Tonight, when the robbers are
all asleep, we will flee together. I have long been waiting for an
opportunity to escape.’

The words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned,
dragging another young girl along with them. They were all drunk, and
paid no heed to her cries and lamentations. They gave her wine to drink,
three glasses full, one of white wine, one of red, and one of yellow,
and with that her heart gave way and she died. Then they tore off her
dainty clothing, laid her on a table, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces, and sprinkled salt upon it.

The poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the
cask, for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by
the robbers. One of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on
the little finger of the murdered girl, and as he could not draw it off
easily, he took a hatchet and cut off the finger; but the finger sprang
into the air, and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was
hiding there. The robber took a light and began looking for it, but he
could not find it. ‘Have you looked behind the large cask?’ said one of
the others. But the old woman called out, ‘Come and eat your suppers,
and let the thing be till tomorrow; the finger won’t run away.’

‘The old woman is right,’ said the robbers, and they ceased looking for
the finger and sat down.

The old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine, and before
long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar, fast asleep and
snoring. As soon as the girl was assured of this, she came from behind
the cask. She was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers, who
were lying close together, and every moment she was filled with renewed
dread lest she should awaken them. But God helped her, so that she
passed safely over them, and then she and the old woman went upstairs,
opened the door, and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers’
den. They found the ashes scattered by the wind, but the peas and
lentils had sprouted, and grown sufficiently above the ground, to guide
them in the moonlight along the path. All night long they walked, and it
was morning before they reached the mill. Then the girl told her father
all that had happened.

The day came that had been fixed for the marriage. The bridegroom
arrived and also a large company of guests, for the miller had taken
care to invite all his friends and relations. As they sat at the feast,
each guest in turn was asked to tell a tale; the bride sat still and did
not say a word.

‘And you, my love,’ said the bridegroom, turning to her, ‘is there no
tale you know? Tell us something.’

‘I will tell you a dream, then,’ said the bride. ‘I went alone through a
forest and came at last to a house; not a soul could I find within, but
a bird that was hanging in a cage on the wall cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

and again a second time it said these words.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘I went on through the house from room to room, but they were all empty,
and everything was so grim and mysterious. At last I went down to the
cellar, and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her
head still. I asked her if my betrothed lived here, and she answered,
“Ah, you poor child, you are come to a murderers’ den; your betrothed
does indeed live here, but he will kill you without mercy and afterwards
cook and eat you.”’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘The old woman hid me behind a large cask, and scarcely had she done
this when the robbers returned home, dragging a young girl along with
them. They gave her three kinds of wine to drink, white, red, and
yellow, and with that she died.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘Then they tore off her dainty clothing, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces and sprinkled salt upon it.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘And one of the robbers saw that there was a gold ring still left on her
finger, and as it was difficult to draw off, he took a hatchet and cut
off her finger; but the finger sprang into the air and fell behind the
great cask into my lap. And here is the finger with the ring.’ And
with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the
assembled guests.

The bridegroom, who during this recital had grown deadly pale, up and
tried to escape, but the guests seized him and held him fast. They
delivered him up to justice, and he and all his murderous band were
condemned to death for their wicked deeds.




TOM THUMB

A poor woodman sat in his cottage one night, smoking his pipe by the
fireside, while his wife sat by his side spinning. ‘How lonely it is,
wife,’ said he, as he puffed out a long curl of smoke, ‘for you and me
to sit here by ourselves, without any children to play about and amuse
us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children!’
‘What you say is very true,’ said the wife, sighing, and turning round
her wheel; ‘how happy should I be if I had but one child! If it were
ever so small--nay, if it were no bigger than my thumb--I should be very
happy, and love it dearly.’ Now--odd as you may think it--it came to
pass that this good woman’s wish was fulfilled, just in the very way she
had wished it; for, not long afterwards, she had a little boy, who was
quite healthy and strong, but was not much bigger than my thumb. So
they said, ‘Well, we cannot say we have not got what we wished for, and,
little as he is, we will love him dearly.’ And they called him Thomas
Thumb.

They gave him plenty of food, yet for all they could do he never grew
bigger, but kept just the same size as he had been when he was born.
Still, his eyes were sharp and sparkling, and he soon showed himself to
be a clever little fellow, who always knew well what he was about.

One day, as the woodman was getting ready to go into the wood to cut
fuel, he said, ‘I wish I had someone to bring the cart after me, for I
want to make haste.’ ‘Oh, father,’ cried Tom, ‘I will take care of that;
the cart shall be in the wood by the time you want it.’ Then the woodman
laughed, and said, ‘How can that be? you cannot reach up to the horse’s
bridle.’ ‘Never mind that, father,’ said Tom; ‘if my mother will only
harness the horse, I will get into his ear and tell him which way to
go.’ ‘Well,’ said the father, ‘we will try for once.’

When the time came the mother harnessed the horse to the cart, and put
Tom into his ear; and as he sat there the little man told the beast how
to go, crying out, ‘Go on!’ and ‘Stop!’ as he wanted: and thus the horse
went on just as well as if the woodman had driven it himself into the
wood. It happened that as the horse was going a little too fast, and Tom
was calling out, ‘Gently! gently!’ two strangers came up. ‘What an odd
thing that is!’ said one: ‘there is a cart going along, and I hear a
carter talking to the horse, but yet I can see no one.’ ‘That is queer,
indeed,’ said the other; ‘let us follow the cart, and see where it
goes.’ So they went on into the wood, till at last they came to the
place where the woodman was. Then Tom Thumb, seeing his father, cried
out, ‘See, father, here I am with the cart, all right and safe! now take
me down!’ So his father took hold of the horse with one hand, and with
the other took his son out of the horse’s ear, and put him down upon a
straw, where he sat as merry as you please.

The two strangers were all this time looking on, and did not know what
to say for wonder. At last one took the other aside, and said, ‘That
little urchin will make our fortune, if we can get him, and carry him
about from town to town as a show; we must buy him.’ So they went up to
the woodman, and asked him what he would take for the little man. ‘He
will be better off,’ said they, ‘with us than with you.’ ‘I won’t sell
him at all,’ said the father; ‘my own flesh and blood is dearer to me
than all the silver and gold in the world.’ But Tom, hearing of the
bargain they wanted to make, crept up his father’s coat to his shoulder
and whispered in his ear, ‘Take the money, father, and let them have me;
I’ll soon come back to you.’

So the woodman at last said he would sell Tom to the strangers for a
large piece of gold, and they paid the price. ‘Where would you like to
sit?’ said one of them. ‘Oh, put me on the rim of your hat; that will be
a nice gallery for me; I can walk about there and see the country as we
go along.’ So they did as he wished; and when Tom had taken leave of his
father they took him away with them.

They journeyed on till it began to be dusky, and then the little man
said, ‘Let me get down, I’m tired.’ So the man took off his hat, and
put him down on a clod of earth, in a ploughed field by the side of the
road. But Tom ran about amongst the furrows, and at last slipped into
an old mouse-hole. ‘Good night, my masters!’ said he, ‘I’m off! mind and
look sharp after me the next time.’ Then they ran at once to the place,
and poked the ends of their sticks into the mouse-hole, but all in vain;
Tom only crawled farther and farther in; and at last it became quite
dark, so that they were forced to go their way without their prize, as
sulky as could be.

When Tom found they were gone, he came out of his hiding-place. ‘What
dangerous walking it is,’ said he, ‘in this ploughed field! If I were to
fall from one of these great clods, I should undoubtedly break my neck.’
At last, by good luck, he found a large empty snail-shell. ‘This is
lucky,’ said he, ‘I can sleep here very well’; and in he crept.

Just as he was falling asleep, he heard two men passing by, chatting
together; and one said to the other, ‘How can we rob that rich parson’s
house of his silver and gold?’ ‘I’ll tell you!’ cried Tom. ‘What noise
was that?’ said the thief, frightened; ‘I’m sure I heard someone speak.’
They stood still listening, and Tom said, ‘Take me with you, and I’ll
soon show you how to get the parson’s money.’ ‘But where are you?’ said
they. ‘Look about on the ground,’ answered he, ‘and listen where the
sound comes from.’ At last the thieves found him out, and lifted him
up in their hands. ‘You little urchin!’ they said, ‘what can you do for
us?’ ‘Why, I can get between the iron window-bars of the parson’s house,
and throw you out whatever you want.’ ‘That’s a good thought,’ said the
thieves; ‘come along, we shall see what you can do.’

When they came to the parson’s house, Tom slipped through the
window-bars into the room, and then called out as loud as he could bawl,
‘Will you have all that is here?’ At this the thieves were frightened,
and said, ‘Softly, softly! Speak low, that you may not awaken anybody.’
But Tom seemed as if he did not understand them, and bawled out again,
‘How much will you have? Shall I throw it all out?’ Now the cook lay in
the next room; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and
listened. Meantime the thieves were frightened, and ran off a little
way; but at last they plucked up their hearts, and said, ‘The little
urchin is only trying to make fools of us.’ So they came back and
whispered softly to him, saying, ‘Now let us have no more of your
roguish jokes; but throw us out some of the money.’ Then Tom called out
as loud as he could, ‘Very well! hold your hands! here it comes.’

The cook heard this quite plain, so she sprang out of bed, and ran to
open the door. The thieves ran off as if a wolf was at their tails: and
the maid, having groped about and found nothing, went away for a light.
By the time she came back, Tom had slipped off into the barn; and when
she had looked about and searched every hole and corner, and found
nobody, she went to bed, thinking she must have been dreaming with her
eyes open.

The little man crawled about in the hay-loft, and at last found a snug
place to finish his night’s rest in; so he laid himself down, meaning
to sleep till daylight, and then find his way home to his father and
mother. But alas! how woefully he was undone! what crosses and sorrows
happen to us all in this world! The cook got up early, before daybreak,
to feed the cows; and going straight to the hay-loft, carried away
a large bundle of hay, with the little man in the middle of it, fast
asleep. He still, however, slept on, and did not awake till he found
himself in the mouth of the cow; for the cook had put the hay into the
cow’s rick, and the cow had taken Tom up in a mouthful of it. ‘Good
lack-a-day!’ said he, ‘how came I to tumble into the mill?’ But he soon
found out where he really was; and was forced to have all his wits about
him, that he might not get between the cow’s teeth, and so be crushed to
death. At last down he went into her stomach. ‘It is rather dark,’ said
he; ‘they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in; a
candle would be no bad thing.’

Though he made the best of his bad luck, he did not like his quarters at
all; and the worst of it was, that more and more hay was always coming
down, and the space left for him became smaller and smaller. At last he
cried out as loud as he could, ‘Don’t bring me any more hay! Don’t bring
me any more hay!’

The maid happened to be just then milking the cow; and hearing someone
speak, but seeing nobody, and yet being quite sure it was the same voice
that she had heard in the night, she was so frightened that she fell off
her stool, and overset the milk-pail. As soon as she could pick herself
up out of the dirt, she ran off as fast as she could to her master the
parson, and said, ‘Sir, sir, the cow is talking!’ But the parson
said, ‘Woman, thou art surely mad!’ However, he went with her into the
cow-house, to try and see what was the matter.

Scarcely had they set foot on the threshold, when Tom called out, ‘Don’t
bring me any more hay!’ Then the parson himself was frightened; and
thinking the cow was surely bewitched, told his man to kill her on the
spot. So the cow was killed, and cut up; and the stomach, in which Tom
lay, was thrown out upon a dunghill.

Tom soon set himself to work to get out, which was not a very easy
task; but at last, just as he had made room to get his head out, fresh
ill-luck befell him. A hungry wolf sprang out, and swallowed up the
whole stomach, with Tom in it, at one gulp, and ran away.

Tom, however, was still not disheartened; and thinking the wolf would
not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along, he called
out, ‘My good friend, I can show you a famous treat.’ ‘Where’s that?’
said the wolf. ‘In such and such a house,’ said Tom, describing his own
father’s house. ‘You can crawl through the drain into the kitchen and
then into the pantry, and there you will find cakes, ham, beef, cold
chicken, roast pig, apple-dumplings, and everything that your heart can
wish.’

The wolf did not want to be asked twice; so that very night he went to
the house and crawled through the drain into the kitchen, and then into
the pantry, and ate and drank there to his heart’s content. As soon as
he had had enough he wanted to get away; but he had eaten so much that
he could not go out by the same way he came in.

This was just what Tom had reckoned upon; and now he began to set up a
great shout, making all the noise he could. ‘Will you be easy?’ said the
wolf; ‘you’ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter.’
‘What’s that to me?’ said the little man; ‘you have had your frolic, now
I’ve a mind to be merry myself’; and he began, singing and shouting as
loud as he could.

The woodman and his wife, being awakened by the noise, peeped through
a crack in the door; but when they saw a wolf was there, you may well
suppose that they were sadly frightened; and the woodman ran for his
axe, and gave his wife a scythe. ‘Do you stay behind,’ said the woodman,
‘and when I have knocked him on the head you must rip him up with the
scythe.’ Tom heard all this, and cried out, ‘Father, father! I am here,
the wolf has swallowed me.’ And his father said, ‘Heaven be praised! we
have found our dear child again’; and he told his wife not to use the
scythe for fear she should hurt him. Then he aimed a great blow, and
struck the wolf on the head, and killed him on the spot! and when he was
dead they cut open his body, and set Tommy free. ‘Ah!’ said the father,
‘what fears we have had for you!’ ‘Yes, father,’ answered he; ‘I have
travelled all over the world, I think, in one way or other, since we
parted; and now I am very glad to come home and get fresh air again.’
‘Why, where have you been?’ said his father. ‘I have been in a
mouse-hole--and in a snail-shell--and down a cow’s throat--and in the
wolf’s belly; and yet here I am again, safe and sound.’

‘Well,’ said they, ‘you are come back, and we will not sell you again
for all the riches in the world.’

Then they hugged and kissed their dear little son, and gave him plenty
to eat and drink, for he was very hungry; and then they fetched new
clothes for him, for his old ones had been quite spoiled on his journey.
So Master Thumb stayed at home with his father and mother, in peace; for
though he had been so great a traveller, and had done and seen so many
fine things, and was fond enough of telling the whole story, he always
agreed that, after all, there’s no place like HOME!




RUMPELSTILTSKIN

By the side of a wood, in a country a long way off, ran a fine stream
of water; and upon the stream there stood a mill. The miller’s house was
close by, and the miller, you must know, had a very beautiful daughter.
She was, moreover, very shrewd and clever; and the miller was so proud
of her, that he one day told the king of the land, who used to come and
hunt in the wood, that his daughter could spin gold out of straw. Now
this king was very fond of money; and when he heard the miller’s boast
his greediness was raised, and he sent for the girl to be brought before
him. Then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great
heap of straw, and gave her a spinning-wheel, and said, ‘All this must
be spun into gold before morning, as you love your life.’ It was in vain
that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father,
for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold: the chamber
door was locked, and she was left alone.

She sat down in one corner of the room, and began to bewail her hard
fate; when on a sudden the door opened, and a droll-looking little man
hobbled in, and said, ‘Good morrow to you, my good lass; what are you
weeping for?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘I must spin this straw into gold, and
I know not how.’ ‘What will you give me,’ said the hobgoblin, ‘to do it
for you?’ ‘My necklace,’ replied the maiden. He took her at her word,
and sat himself down to the wheel, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

And round about the wheel went merrily; the work was quickly done, and
the straw was all spun into gold.

When the king came and saw this, he was greatly astonished and pleased;
but his heart grew still more greedy of gain, and he shut up the poor
miller’s daughter again with a fresh task. Then she knew not what to do,
and sat down once more to weep; but the dwarf soon opened the door, and
said, ‘What will you give me to do your task?’ ‘The ring on my finger,’
said she. So her little friend took the ring, and began to work at the
wheel again, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

till, long before morning, all was done again.

The king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure;
but still he had not enough: so he took the miller’s daughter to a yet
larger heap, and said, ‘All this must be spun tonight; and if it is,
you shall be my queen.’ As soon as she was alone that dwarf came in, and
said, ‘What will you give me to spin gold for you this third time?’
‘I have nothing left,’ said she. ‘Then say you will give me,’ said
the little man, ‘the first little child that you may have when you are
queen.’ ‘That may never be,’ thought the miller’s daughter: and as she
knew no other way to get her task done, she said she would do what he
asked. Round went the wheel again to the old song, and the manikin once
more spun the heap into gold. The king came in the morning, and, finding
all he wanted, was forced to keep his word; so he married the miller’s
daughter, and she really became queen.

At the birth of her first little child she was very glad, and forgot the
dwarf, and what she had said. But one day he came into her room, where
she was sitting playing with her baby, and put her in mind of it. Then
she grieved sorely at her misfortune, and said she would give him all
the wealth of the kingdom if he would let her off, but in vain; till at
last her tears softened him, and he said, ‘I will give you three days’
grace, and if during that time you tell me my name, you shall keep your
child.’

Now the queen lay awake all night, thinking of all the odd names that
she had ever heard; and she sent messengers all over the land to find
out new ones. The next day the little man came, and she began with
TIMOTHY, ICHABOD, BENJAMIN, JEREMIAH, and all the names she could
remember; but to all and each of them he said, ‘Madam, that is not my
name.’

The second day she began with all the comical names she could hear of,
BANDY-LEGS, HUNCHBACK, CROOK-SHANKS, and so on; but the little gentleman
still said to every one of them, ‘Madam, that is not my name.’

The third day one of the messengers came back, and said, ‘I have
travelled two days without hearing of any other names; but yesterday, as
I was climbing a high hill, among the trees of the forest where the fox
and the hare bid each other good night, I saw a little hut; and before
the hut burnt a fire; and round about the fire a funny little dwarf was
dancing upon one leg, and singing:

 “Merrily the feast I’ll make.
  Today I’ll brew, tomorrow bake;
  Merrily I’ll dance and sing,
  For next day will a stranger bring.
  Little does my lady dream
  Rumpelstiltskin is my name!”

When the queen heard this she jumped for joy, and as soon as her little
friend came she sat down upon her throne, and called all her court round
to enjoy the fun; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her
arms, as if it was quite ready to be given up. Then the little man began
to chuckle at the thought of having the poor child, to take home with
him to his hut in the woods; and he cried out, ‘Now, lady, what is my
name?’ ‘Is it JOHN?’ asked she. ‘No, madam!’ ‘Is it TOM?’ ‘No, madam!’
‘Is it JEMMY?’ ‘It is not.’ ‘Can your name be RUMPELSTILTSKIN?’ said the
lady slyly. ‘Some witch told you that!--some witch told you that!’ cried
the little man, and dashed his right foot in a rage so deep into the
floor, that he was forced to lay hold of it with both hands to pull it
out.

Then he made the best of his way off, while the nurse laughed and the
baby crowed; and all the court jeered at him for having had so much
trouble for nothing, and said, ‘We wish you a very good morning, and a
merry feast, Mr RUMPLESTILTSKIN!’




CLEVER GRETEL

There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes with red heels, and
when she walked out with them on, she turned herself this way and that,
was quite happy and thought: ‘You certainly are a pretty girl!’ And when
she came home she drank, in her gladness of heart, a draught of wine,
and as wine excites a desire to eat, she tasted the best of whatever she
was cooking until she was satisfied, and said: ‘The cook must know what
the food is like.’

It came to pass that the master one day said to her: ‘Gretel, there is a
guest coming this evening; prepare me two fowls very daintily.’ ‘I will
see to it, master,’ answered Gretel. She killed two fowls, scalded them,
plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them before
the fire, that they might roast. The fowls began to turn brown, and were
nearly ready, but the guest had not yet arrived. Then Gretel called out
to her master: ‘If the guest does not come, I must take the fowls away
from the fire, but it will be a sin and a shame if they are not eaten
the moment they are at their juiciest.’ The master said: ‘I will run
myself, and fetch the guest.’ When the master had turned his back,
Gretel laid the spit with the fowls on one side, and thought: ‘Standing
so long by the fire there, makes one sweat and thirsty; who knows
when they will come? Meanwhile, I will run into the cellar, and take a
drink.’ She ran down, set a jug, said: ‘God bless it for you, Gretel,’
and took a good drink, and thought that wine should flow on, and should
not be interrupted, and took yet another hearty draught.

Then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire, basted them,
and drove the spit merrily round. But as the roast meat smelt so good,
Gretel thought: ‘Something might be wrong, it ought to be tasted!’
She touched it with her finger, and said: ‘Ah! how good fowls are! It
certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten at the right
time!’ She ran to the window, to see if the master was not coming with
his guest, but she saw no one, and went back to the fowls and thought:
‘One of the wings is burning! I had better take it off and eat it.’
So she cut it off, ate it, and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she
thought: ‘The other must go down too, or else master will observe that
something is missing.’ When the two wings were eaten, she went and
looked for her master, and did not see him. It suddenly occurred to
her: ‘Who knows? They are perhaps not coming at all, and have turned in
somewhere.’ Then she said: ‘Well, Gretel, enjoy yourself, one fowl has
been cut into, take another drink, and eat it up entirely; when it is
eaten you will have some peace, why should God’s good gifts be spoilt?’
So she ran into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the
one chicken in great glee. When one of the chickens was swallowed down,
and still her master did not come, Gretel looked at the other and said:
‘What one is, the other should be likewise, the two go together; what’s
right for the one is right for the other; I think if I were to take
another draught it would do me no harm.’ So she took another hearty
drink, and let the second chicken follow the first.

While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried: ‘Hurry
up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me!’ ‘Yes, sir, I will
soon serve up,’ answered Gretel. Meantime the master looked to see that
the table was properly laid, and took the great knife, wherewith he was
going to carve the chickens, and sharpened it on the steps. Presently
the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the house-door.
Gretel ran, and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest,
she put her finger to her lips and said: ‘Hush! hush! go away as quickly
as you can, if my master catches you it will be the worse for you; he
certainly did ask you to supper, but his intention is to cut off your
two ears. Just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it!’ The guest
heard the sharpening, and hurried down the steps again as fast as he
could. Gretel was not idle; she ran screaming to her master, and cried:
‘You have invited a fine guest!’ ‘Why, Gretel? What do you mean by
that?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘he has taken the chickens which I was just
going to serve up, off the dish, and has run away with them!’ ‘That’s a
nice trick!’ said her master, and lamented the fine chickens. ‘If he had
but left me one, so that something remained for me to eat.’ He called to
him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Then he ran after him
with the knife still in his hand, crying: ‘Just one, just one,’ meaning
that the guest should leave him just one chicken, and not take both. The
guest, however, thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of
his ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order to take
them both with him.




THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON

There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his ears dull
of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table he could hardly
hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth or let it run
out of his mouth. His son and his son’s wife were disgusted at this, so
the old grandfather at last had to sit in the corner behind the stove,
and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not even enough
of it. And he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of
tears. Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it
fell to the ground and broke. The young wife scolded him, but he said
nothing and only sighed. Then they brought him a wooden bowl for a few
half-pence, out of which he had to eat.

They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years old
began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground. ‘What are
you doing there?’ asked the father. ‘I am making a little trough,’
answered the child, ‘for father and mother to eat out of when I am big.’

The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presently
began to cry. Then they took the old grandfather to the table, and
henceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing if he
did spill a little of anything.




THE LITTLE PEASANT

There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich
peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little peasant. He
had not even so much as a cow, and still less money to buy one, and
yet he and his wife did so wish to have one. One day he said to her:
‘Listen, I have a good idea, there is our gossip the carpenter, he shall
make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, so that it looks like any
other, and in time it will certainly get big and be a cow.’ the woman
also liked the idea, and their gossip the carpenter cut and planed
the calf, and painted it as it ought to be, and made it with its head
hanging down as if it were eating.

Next morning when the cows were being driven out, the little peasant
called the cow-herd in and said: ‘Look, I have a little calf there,
but it is still small and has to be carried.’ The cow-herd said: ‘All
right,’ and took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture, and set
it among the grass. The little calf always remained standing like one
which was eating, and the cow-herd said: ‘It will soon run by itself,
just look how it eats already!’ At night when he was going to drive the
herd home again, he said to the calf: ‘If you can stand there and eat
your fill, you can also go on your four legs; I don’t care to drag you
home again in my arms.’ But the little peasant stood at his door, and
waited for his little calf, and when the cow-herd drove the cows through
the village, and the calf was missing, he inquired where it was. The
cow-herd answered: ‘It is still standing out there eating. It would not
stop and come with us.’ But the little peasant said: ‘Oh, but I must
have my beast back again.’ Then they went back to the meadow together,
but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone. The cow-herd said: ‘It
must have run away.’ The peasant, however, said: ‘Don’t tell me
that,’ and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for his carelessness
condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away.

And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had
so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but they had no food for
it, and could give it nothing to eat, so it soon had to be killed. They
salted the flesh, and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell
the skin there, so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds. On
the way he passed by a mill, and there sat a raven with broken wings,
and out of pity he took him and wrapped him in the skin. But as the
weather grew so bad and there was a storm of rain and wind, he could
go no farther, and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter. The
miller’s wife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant: ‘Lay
yourself on the straw there,’ and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.
The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman
thought: ‘He is tired and has gone to sleep.’ In the meantime came the
parson; the miller’s wife received him well, and said: ‘My husband is
out, so we will have a feast.’ The peasant listened, and when he heard
them talk about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make
shift with a slice of bread and cheese. Then the woman served up four
different things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.

Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking
outside. The woman said: ‘Oh, heavens! It is my husband!’ she quickly
hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove, the wine under the pillow,
the salad on the bed, the cakes under it, and the parson in the closet
on the porch. Then she opened the door for her husband, and said: ‘Thank
heaven, you are back again! There is such a storm, it looks as if the
world were coming to an end.’ The miller saw the peasant lying on the
straw, and asked, ‘What is that fellow doing there?’ ‘Ah,’ said the
wife, ‘the poor knave came in the storm and rain, and begged for
shelter, so I gave him a bit of bread and cheese, and showed him where
the straw was.’ The man said: ‘I have no objection, but be quick and get
me something to eat.’ The woman said: ‘But I have nothing but bread and
cheese.’ ‘I am contented with anything,’ replied the husband, ‘so far as
I am concerned, bread and cheese will do,’ and looked at the peasant and
said: ‘Come and eat some more with me.’ The peasant did not require to
be invited twice, but got up and ate. After this the miller saw the skin
in which the raven was, lying on the ground, and asked: ‘What have you
there?’ The peasant answered: ‘I have a soothsayer inside it.’ ‘Can
he foretell anything to me?’ said the miller. ‘Why not?’ answered
the peasant: ‘but he only says four things, and the fifth he keeps to
himself.’ The miller was curious, and said: ‘Let him foretell something
for once.’ Then the peasant pinched the raven’s head, so that he croaked
and made a noise like krr, krr. The miller said: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant answered: ‘In the first place, he says that there is some wine
hidden under the pillow.’ ‘Bless me!’ cried the miller, and went there
and found the wine. ‘Now go on,’ said he. The peasant made the raven
croak again, and said: ‘In the second place, he says that there is some
roast meat in the tiled stove.’ ‘Upon my word!’ cried the miller, and
went thither, and found the roast meat. The peasant made the raven
prophesy still more, and said: ‘Thirdly, he says that there is some
salad on the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the miller, and
went there and found the salad. At last the peasant pinched the raven
once more till he croaked, and said: ‘Fourthly, he says that there
are some cakes under the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the
miller, and looked there, and found the cakes.

And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller’s wife
was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all the keys with
her. The miller would have liked much to know the fifth, but the little
peasant said: ‘First, we will quickly eat the four things, for the fifth
is something bad.’ So they ate, and after that they bargained how much
the miller was to give for the fifth prophecy, until they agreed on
three hundred talers. Then the peasant once more pinched the raven’s
head till he croaked loudly. The miller asked: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant replied: ‘He says that the Devil is hiding outside there in
the closet on the porch.’ The miller said: ‘The Devil must go out,’ and
opened the house-door; then the woman was forced to give up the keys,
and the peasant unlocked the closet. The parson ran out as fast as he
could, and the miller said: ‘It was true; I saw the black rascal with my
own eyes.’ The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreak with
the three hundred talers.

At home the small peasant gradually launched out; he built a beautiful
house, and the peasants said: ‘The small peasant has certainly been to
the place where golden snow falls, and people carry the gold home in
shovels.’ Then the small peasant was brought before the mayor, and
bidden to say from whence his wealth came. He answered: ‘I sold my cow’s
skin in the town, for three hundred talers.’ When the peasants heard
that, they too wished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed
all their cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in
the town to the greatest advantage. The mayor, however, said: ‘But my
servant must go first.’ When she came to the merchant in the town, he
did not give her more than two talers for a skin, and when the others
came, he did not give them so much, and said: ‘What can I do with all
these skins?’

Then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have thus
outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accused him of this
treachery before the mayor. The innocent little peasant was unanimously
sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the water, in a barrel
pierced full of holes. He was led forth, and a priest was brought who
was to say a mass for his soul. The others were all obliged to retire to
a distance, and when the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the
man who had been with the miller’s wife. He said to him: ‘I set you free
from the closet, set me free from the barrel.’ At this same moment up
came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whom the peasant knew had
long been wishing to be mayor, so he cried with all his might: ‘No, I
will not do it; if the whole world insists on it, I will not do it!’ The
shepherd hearing that, came up to him, and asked: ‘What are you about?
What is it that you will not do?’ The peasant said: ‘They want to make
me mayor, if I will but put myself in the barrel, but I will not do it.’
The shepherd said: ‘If nothing more than that is needful in order to be
mayor, I would get into the barrel at once.’ The peasant said: ‘If you
will get in, you will be mayor.’ The shepherd was willing, and got in,
and the peasant shut the top down on him; then he took the shepherd’s
flock for himself, and drove it away. The parson went to the crowd,
and declared that the mass had been said. Then they came and rolled the
barrel towards the water. When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd
cried: ‘I am quite willing to be mayor.’ They believed no otherwise than
that it was the peasant who was saying this, and answered: ‘That is
what we intend, but first you shall look about you a little down below
there,’ and they rolled the barrel down into the water.

After that the peasants went home, and as they were entering the
village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving a flock of
sheep and looking quite contented. Then the peasants were astonished,
and said: ‘Peasant, from whence do you come? Have you come out of the
water?’ ‘Yes, truly,’ replied the peasant, ‘I sank deep, deep down,
until at last I got to the bottom; I pushed the bottom out of the
barrel, and crept out, and there were pretty meadows on which a number
of lambs were feeding, and from thence I brought this flock away with
me.’ Said the peasants: ‘Are there any more there?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ said he,
‘more than I could want.’ Then the peasants made up their minds that
they too would fetch some sheep for themselves, a flock apiece, but the
mayor said: ‘I come first.’ So they went to the water together, and just
then there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky, which
are called little lambs, and they were reflected in the water, whereupon
the peasants cried: ‘We already see the sheep down below!’ The mayor
pressed forward and said: ‘I will go down first, and look about me, and
if things promise well I’ll call you.’ So he jumped in; splash! went
the water; it sounded as if he were calling them, and the whole crowd
plunged in after him as one man. Then the entire village was dead, and
the small peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.




FREDERICK AND CATHERINE

There was once a man called Frederick: he had a wife whose name was
Catherine, and they had not long been married. One day Frederick said.
‘Kate! I am going to work in the fields; when I come back I shall be
hungry so let me have something nice cooked, and a good draught of ale.’
‘Very well,’ said she, ‘it shall all be ready.’ When dinner-time drew
nigh, Catherine took a nice steak, which was all the meat she had, and
put it on the fire to fry. The steak soon began to look brown, and to
crackle in the pan; and Catherine stood by with a fork and turned it:
then she said to herself, ‘The steak is almost ready, I may as well go
to the cellar for the ale.’ So she left the pan on the fire and took a
large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask. The beer ran
into the jug and Catherine stood looking on. At last it popped into her
head, ‘The dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak;
that’s well thought of.’ So up she ran from the cellar; and sure enough
the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth, and was making off with
it.

Away ran Catherine, and away ran the dog across the field: but he ran
faster than she, and stuck close to the steak. ‘It’s all gone, and “what
can’t be cured must be endured”,’ said Catherine. So she turned round;
and as she had run a good way and was tired, she walked home leisurely
to cool herself.

Now all this time the ale was running too, for Catherine had not turned
the cock; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till
the cask was empty. When she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had
happened. ‘My stars!’ said she, ‘what shall I do to keep Frederick from
seeing all this slopping about?’ So she thought a while; and at last
remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair,
and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale
nicely. ‘What a lucky thing,’ said she, ‘that we kept that meal! we have
now a good use for it.’ So away she went for it: but she managed to set
it down just upon the great jug full of beer, and upset it; and thus
all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also. ‘Ah!
well,’ said she, ‘when one goes another may as well follow.’ Then she
strewed the meal all about the cellar, and was quite pleased with her
cleverness, and said, ‘How very neat and clean it looks!’

At noon Frederick came home. ‘Now, wife,’ cried he, ‘what have you for
dinner?’ ‘O Frederick!’ answered she, ‘I was cooking you a steak; but
while I went down to draw the ale, the dog ran away with it; and while
I ran after him, the ale ran out; and when I went to dry up the ale
with the sack of meal that we got at the fair, I upset the jug: but the
cellar is now quite dry, and looks so clean!’ ‘Kate, Kate,’ said he,
‘how could you do all this?’ Why did you leave the steak to fry, and the
ale to run, and then spoil all the meal?’ ‘Why, Frederick,’ said she, ‘I
did not know I was doing wrong; you should have told me before.’

The husband thought to himself, ‘If my wife manages matters thus, I must
look sharp myself.’ Now he had a good deal of gold in the house: so he
said to Catherine, ‘What pretty yellow buttons these are! I shall put
them into a box and bury them in the garden; but take care that you
never go near or meddle with them.’ ‘No, Frederick,’ said she, ‘that
I never will.’ As soon as he was gone, there came by some pedlars with
earthenware plates and dishes, and they asked her whether she would buy.
‘Oh dear me, I should like to buy very much, but I have no money: if
you had any use for yellow buttons, I might deal with you.’ ‘Yellow
buttons!’ said they: ‘let us have a look at them.’ ‘Go into the garden
and dig where I tell you, and you will find the yellow buttons: I dare
not go myself.’ So the rogues went: and when they found what these
yellow buttons were, they took them all away, and left her plenty of
plates and dishes. Then she set them all about the house for a show:
and when Frederick came back, he cried out, ‘Kate, what have you been
doing?’ ‘See,’ said she, ‘I have bought all these with your yellow
buttons: but I did not touch them myself; the pedlars went themselves
and dug them up.’ ‘Wife, wife,’ said Frederick, ‘what a pretty piece of
work you have made! those yellow buttons were all my money: how came you
to do such a thing?’ ‘Why,’ answered she, ‘I did not know there was any
harm in it; you should have told me.’

Catherine stood musing for a while, and at last said to her husband,
‘Hark ye, Frederick, we will soon get the gold back: let us run after
the thieves.’ ‘Well, we will try,’ answered he; ‘but take some butter
and cheese with you, that we may have something to eat by the way.’
‘Very well,’ said she; and they set out: and as Frederick walked the
fastest, he left his wife some way behind. ‘It does not matter,’ thought
she: ‘when we turn back, I shall be so much nearer home than he.’

Presently she came to the top of a hill, down the side of which there
was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees
on each side as they passed. ‘Ah, see now,’ said she, ‘how they have
bruised and wounded those poor trees; they will never get well.’ So she
took pity on them, and made use of the butter to grease them all, so
that the wheels might not hurt them so much. While she was doing this
kind office one of her cheeses fell out of the basket, and rolled down
the hill. Catherine looked, but could not see where it had gone; so she
said, ‘Well, I suppose the other will go the same way and find you; he
has younger legs than I have.’ Then she rolled the other cheese after
it; and away it went, nobody knows where, down the hill. But she said
she supposed that they knew the road, and would follow her, and she
could not stay there all day waiting for them.

At last she overtook Frederick, who desired her to give him something to
eat. Then she gave him the dry bread. ‘Where are the butter and cheese?’
said he. ‘Oh!’ answered she, ‘I used the butter to grease those poor
trees that the wheels chafed so: and one of the cheeses ran away so I
sent the other after it to find it, and I suppose they are both on
the road together somewhere.’ ‘What a goose you are to do such silly
things!’ said the husband. ‘How can you say so?’ said she; ‘I am sure
you never told me not.’

They ate the dry bread together; and Frederick said, ‘Kate, I hope you
locked the door safe when you came away.’ ‘No,’ answered she, ‘you did
not tell me.’ ‘Then go home, and do it now before we go any farther,’
said Frederick, ‘and bring with you something to eat.’

Catherine did as he told her, and thought to herself by the way,
‘Frederick wants something to eat; but I don’t think he is very fond of
butter and cheese: I’ll bring him a bag of fine nuts, and the vinegar,
for I have often seen him take some.’

When she reached home, she bolted the back door, but the front door she
took off the hinges, and said, ‘Frederick told me to lock the door, but
surely it can nowhere be so safe if I take it with me.’ So she took
her time by the way; and when she overtook her husband she cried
out, ‘There, Frederick, there is the door itself, you may watch it as
carefully as you please.’ ‘Alas! alas!’ said he, ‘what a clever wife I
have! I sent you to make the house fast, and you take the door away, so
that everybody may go in and out as they please--however, as you have
brought the door, you shall carry it about with you for your pains.’
‘Very well,’ answered she, ‘I’ll carry the door; but I’ll not carry the
nuts and vinegar bottle also--that would be too much of a load; so if
you please, I’ll fasten them to the door.’

Frederick of course made no objection to that plan, and they set off
into the wood to look for the thieves; but they could not find them: and
when it grew dark, they climbed up into a tree to spend the night there.
Scarcely were they up, than who should come by but the very rogues they
were looking for. They were in truth great rascals, and belonged to that
class of people who find things before they are lost; they were tired;
so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where Frederick and
Catherine were. Frederick slipped down on the other side, and picked up
some stones. Then he climbed up again, and tried to hit the thieves on
the head with them: but they only said, ‘It must be near morning, for
the wind shakes the fir-apples down.’

Catherine, who had the door on her shoulder, began to be very tired;
but she thought it was the nuts upon it that were so heavy: so she said
softly, ‘Frederick, I must let the nuts go.’ ‘No,’ answered he, ‘not
now, they will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that: they must go.’ ‘Well,
then, make haste and throw them down, if you will.’ Then away rattled
the nuts down among the boughs and one of the thieves cried, ‘Bless me,
it is hailing.’

A little while after, Catherine thought the door was still very heavy:
so she whispered to Frederick, ‘I must throw the vinegar down.’ ‘Pray
don’t,’ answered he, ‘it will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that,’ said
she, ‘go it must.’ So she poured all the vinegar down; and the thieves
said, ‘What a heavy dew there is!’

At last it popped into Catherine’s head that it was the door itself that
was so heavy all the time: so she whispered, ‘Frederick, I must throw
the door down soon.’ But he begged and prayed her not to do so, for he
was sure it would betray them. ‘Here goes, however,’ said she: and down
went the door with such a clatter upon the thieves, that they cried
out ‘Murder!’ and not knowing what was coming, ran away as fast as they
could, and left all the gold. So when Frederick and Catherine came down,
there they found all their money safe and sound.




SWEETHEART ROLAND

There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two
daughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she was
her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one she hated,
because she was her stepdaughter. The stepdaughter once had a pretty
apron, which the other fancied so much that she became envious, and
told her mother that she must and would have that apron. ‘Be quiet, my
child,’ said the old woman, ‘and you shall have it. Your stepsister has
long deserved death; tonight when she is asleep I will come and cut her
head off. Only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed, and
push her well to the front.’ It would have been all over with the poor
girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner, and heard
everything. All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bedtime
had come, the witch’s daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at the
far side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the
front, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall. In
the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in her right
hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside,
and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut her own child’s
head off.

When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who
was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out, she said
to him: ‘Listen, dearest Roland, we must fly in all haste; my stepmother
wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child. When daylight comes,
and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.’ ‘But,’ said Roland,
‘I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, or we cannot escape
if she pursues us.’ The maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took the
dead girl’s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground, one in
front of the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the stairs. Then she
hurried away with her lover.

When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, and
wanted to give her the apron, but she did not come. Then the witch
cried: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping,’ answered
the first drop of blood. The old woman went out, but saw no one on the
stairs, and cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here in the kitchen, I am
warming myself,’ cried the second drop of blood. She went into the
kitchen, but found no one. Then she cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Ah,
here in the bed, I am sleeping,’ cried the third drop of blood. She went
into the room to the bed. What did she see there? Her own child,
whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood. The witch fell into
a passion, sprang to the window, and as she could look forth quite far
into the world, she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her
sweetheart Roland. ‘That shall not help you,’ cried she, ‘even if you
have got a long way off, you shall still not escape me.’ She put on her
many-league boots, in which she covered an hour’s walk at every step,
and it was not long before she overtook them. The girl, however, when
she saw the old woman striding towards her, changed, with her magic
wand, her sweetheart Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck
swimming in the middle of it. The witch placed herself on the shore,
threw breadcrumbs in, and went to endless trouble to entice the duck;
but the duck did not let herself be enticed, and the old woman had to
go home at night as she had come. At this the girl and her sweetheart
Roland resumed their natural shapes again, and they walked on the whole
night until daybreak. Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful
flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart
Roland into a fiddler. It was not long before the witch came striding up
towards them, and said to the musician: ‘Dear musician, may I pluck that
beautiful flower for myself?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will play to
you while you do it.’ As she was hastily creeping into the hedge and was
just going to pluck the flower, knowing perfectly well who the flower
was, he began to play, and whether she would or not, she was forced
to dance, for it was a magical dance. The faster he played, the more
violent springs was she forced to make, and the thorns tore her clothes
from her body, and pricked her and wounded her till she bled, and as he
did not stop, she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground.

As they were now set free, Roland said: ‘Now I will go to my father and
arrange for the wedding.’ ‘Then in the meantime I will stay here and
wait for you,’ said the girl, ‘and that no one may recognize me, I will
change myself into a red stone landmark.’ Then Roland went away, and the
girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved.
But when Roland got home, he fell into the snares of another, who so
fascinated him that he forgot the maiden. The poor girl remained there a
long time, but at length, as he did not return at all, she was sad, and
changed herself into a flower, and thought: ‘Someone will surely come
this way, and trample me down.’

It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw
the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it with him, and
laid it away in his chest. From that time forth, strange things happened
in the shepherd’s house. When he arose in the morning, all the work was
already done, the room was swept, the table and benches cleaned, the
fire in the hearth was lighted, and the water was fetched, and at noon,
when he came home, the table was laid, and a good dinner served. He
could not conceive how this came to pass, for he never saw a human being
in his house, and no one could have concealed himself in it. He was
certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at last he was so
afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice. The wise
woman said: ‘There is some enchantment behind it, listen very early some
morning if anything is moving in the room, and if you see anything, no
matter what it is, throw a white cloth over it, and then the magic will
be stopped.’

The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as day dawned,
he saw the chest open, and the flower come out. Swiftly he
sprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it. Instantly the
transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him,
who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to this
time she had attended to his house-keeping. She told him her story,
and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but she
answered: ‘No,’ for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart
Roland, although he had deserted her. Nevertheless, she promised not to
go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.

And now the time drew near when Roland’s wedding was to be celebrated,
and then, according to an old custom in the country, it was announced
that all the girls were to be present at it, and sing in honour of the
bridal pair. When the faithful maiden heard of this, she grew so sad
that she thought her heart would break, and she would not go thither,
but the other girls came and took her. When it came to her turn to sing,
she stepped back, until at last she was the only one left, and then she
could not refuse. But when she began her song, and it reached Roland’s
ears, he sprang up and cried: ‘I know the voice, that is the true
bride, I will have no other!’ Everything he had forgotten, and which had
vanished from his mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart. Then
the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart Roland, and
grief came to an end and joy began.




SNOWDROP

It was the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were falling
around, that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working
at her window. The frame of the window was made of fine black ebony, and
as she sat looking out upon the snow, she pricked her finger, and three
drops of blood fell upon it. Then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red
drops that sprinkled the white snow, and said, ‘Would that my little
daughter may be as white as that snow, as red as that blood, and as
black as this ebony windowframe!’ And so the little girl really did grow
up; her skin was as white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as the blood, and
her hair as black as ebony; and she was called Snowdrop.

But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who became
queen, and was very beautiful, but so vain that she could not bear
to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was. She had a fairy
looking-glass, to which she used to go, and then she would gaze upon
herself in it, and say:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass had always answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all the land.’

But Snowdrop grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven years
old she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen herself.
Then the glass one day answered the queen, when she went to look in it
as usual:

 ‘Thou, queen, art fair, and beauteous to see,
  But Snowdrop is lovelier far than thee!’

When she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy, and called to
one of her servants, and said, ‘Take Snowdrop away into the wide wood,
that I may never see her any more.’ Then the servant led her away; but
his heart melted when Snowdrop begged him to spare her life, and he
said, ‘I will not hurt you, thou pretty child.’ So he left her by
herself; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would
tear her in pieces, he felt as if a great weight were taken off his
heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her but to leave her to
her fate, with the chance of someone finding and saving her.

Then poor Snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear; and
the wild beasts roared about her, but none did her any harm. In the
evening she came to a cottage among the hills, and went in to rest, for
her little feet would carry her no further. Everything was spruce and
neat in the cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth, and there
were seven little plates, seven little loaves, and seven little glasses
with wine in them; and seven knives and forks laid in order; and by
the wall stood seven little beds. As she was very hungry, she picked
a little piece of each loaf and drank a very little wine out of each
glass; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest. So she
tried all the little beds; but one was too long, and another was too
short, till at last the seventh suited her: and there she laid herself
down and went to sleep.

By and by in came the masters of the cottage. Now they were seven little
dwarfs, that lived among the mountains, and dug and searched for gold.
They lighted up their seven lamps, and saw at once that all was not
right. The first said, ‘Who has been sitting on my stool?’ The second,
‘Who has been eating off my plate?’ The third, ‘Who has been picking my
bread?’ The fourth, ‘Who has been meddling with my spoon?’ The fifth,
‘Who has been handling my fork?’ The sixth, ‘Who has been cutting with
my knife?’ The seventh, ‘Who has been drinking my wine?’ Then the first
looked round and said, ‘Who has been lying on my bed?’ And the rest came
running to him, and everyone cried out that somebody had been upon his
bed. But the seventh saw Snowdrop, and called all his brethren to come
and see her; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought
their lamps to look at her, and said, ‘Good heavens! what a lovely child
she is!’ And they were very glad to see her, and took care not to wake
her; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs
in turn, till the night was gone.

In the morning Snowdrop told them all her story; and they pitied her,
and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and wash and
knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and they would
take good care of her. Then they went out all day long to their work,
seeking for gold and silver in the mountains: but Snowdrop was left at
home; and they warned her, and said, ‘The queen will soon find out where
you are, so take care and let no one in.’

But the queen, now that she thought Snowdrop was dead, believed that she
must be the handsomest lady in the land; and she went to her glass and
said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the queen was very much frightened; for she knew that the glass
always spoke the truth, and was sure that the servant had betrayed her.
And she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful
than she was; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar, and went
her way over the hills, to the place where the dwarfs dwelt. Then she
knocked at the door, and cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ Snowdrop looked
out at the window, and said, ‘Good day, good woman! what have you to
sell?’ ‘Good wares, fine wares,’ said she; ‘laces and bobbins of all
colours.’ ‘I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a very good
sort of body,’ thought Snowdrop, as she ran down and unbolted the door.
‘Bless me!’ said the old woman, ‘how badly your stays are laced! Let me
lace them up with one of my nice new laces.’ Snowdrop did not dream of
any mischief; so she stood before the old woman; but she set to work
so nimbly, and pulled the lace so tight, that Snowdrop’s breath was
stopped, and she fell down as if she were dead. ‘There’s an end to all
thy beauty,’ said the spiteful queen, and went away home.

In the evening the seven dwarfs came home; and I need not say how
grieved they were to see their faithful Snowdrop stretched out upon the
ground, as if she was quite dead. However, they lifted her up, and when
they found what ailed her, they cut the lace; and in a little time she
began to breathe, and very soon came to life again. Then they said, ‘The
old woman was the queen herself; take care another time, and let no one
in when we are away.’

When the queen got home, she went straight to her glass, and spoke to it
as before; but to her great grief it still said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice, to see that
Snowdrop still lived; and she dressed herself up again, but in quite
another dress from the one she wore before, and took with her a poisoned
comb. When she reached the dwarfs’ cottage, she knocked at the door, and
cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ But Snowdrop said, ‘I dare not let anyone
in.’ Then the queen said, ‘Only look at my beautiful combs!’ and gave
her the poisoned one. And it looked so pretty, that she took it up and
put it into her hair to try it; but the moment it touched her head,
the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless. ‘There you may
lie,’ said the queen, and went her way. But by good luck the dwarfs
came in very early that evening; and when they saw Snowdrop lying on
the ground, they thought what had happened, and soon found the poisoned
comb. And when they took it away she got well, and told them all that
had passed; and they warned her once more not to open the door to
anyone.

Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and shook with rage when she
read the very same answer as before; and she said, ‘Snowdrop shall die,
if it cost me my life.’ So she went by herself into her chamber, and got
ready a poisoned apple: the outside looked very rosy and tempting, but
whoever tasted it was sure to die. Then she dressed herself up as a
peasant’s wife, and travelled over the hills to the dwarfs’ cottage,
and knocked at the door; but Snowdrop put her head out of the window and
said, ‘I dare not let anyone in, for the dwarfs have told me not.’ ‘Do
as you please,’ said the old woman, ‘but at any rate take this pretty
apple; I will give it you.’ ‘No,’ said Snowdrop, ‘I dare not take it.’
‘You silly girl!’ answered the other, ‘what are you afraid of? Do you
think it is poisoned? Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the
other.’ Now the apple was so made up that one side was good, though the
other side was poisoned. Then Snowdrop was much tempted to taste, for
the apple looked so very nice; and when she saw the old woman eat, she
could wait no longer. But she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth,
when she fell down dead upon the ground. ‘This time nothing will save
thee,’ said the queen; and she went home to her glass, and at last it
said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest of all the fair.’

And then her wicked heart was glad, and as happy as such a heart could
be.

When evening came, and the dwarfs had gone home, they found Snowdrop
lying on the ground: no breath came from her lips, and they were afraid
that she was quite dead. They lifted her up, and combed her hair, and
washed her face with wine and water; but all was in vain, for the little
girl seemed quite dead. So they laid her down upon a bier, and all seven
watched and bewailed her three whole days; and then they thought they
would bury her: but her cheeks were still rosy; and her face looked just
as it did while she was alive; so they said, ‘We will never bury her in
the cold ground.’ And they made a coffin of glass, so that they might
still look at her, and wrote upon it in golden letters what her name
was, and that she was a king’s daughter. And the coffin was set among
the hills, and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and watched. And the
birds of the air came too, and bemoaned Snowdrop; and first of all came
an owl, and then a raven, and at last a dove, and sat by her side.

And thus Snowdrop lay for a long, long time, and still only looked as
though she was asleep; for she was even now as white as snow, and as red
as blood, and as black as ebony. At last a prince came and called at the
dwarfs’ house; and he saw Snowdrop, and read what was written in golden
letters. Then he offered the dwarfs money, and prayed and besought them
to let him take her away; but they said, ‘We will not part with her for
all the gold in the world.’ At last, however, they had pity on him, and
gave him the coffin; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home
with him, the piece of apple fell from between her lips, and Snowdrop
awoke, and said, ‘Where am I?’ And the prince said, ‘Thou art quite safe
with me.’

Then he told her all that had happened, and said, ‘I love you far better
than all the world; so come with me to my father’s palace, and you shall
be my wife.’ And Snowdrop consented, and went home with the prince;
and everything was got ready with great pomp and splendour for their
wedding.

To the feast was asked, among the rest, Snowdrop’s old enemy the queen;
and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes, she looked in the
glass and said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, lady, art loveliest here, I ween;
  But lovelier far is the new-made queen.’

When she heard this she started with rage; but her envy and curiosity
were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the bride. And
when she got there, and saw that it was no other than Snowdrop, who, as
she thought, had been dead a long while, she choked with rage, and fell
down and died: but Snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily
over that land many, many years; and sometimes they went up into the
mountains, and paid a visit to the little dwarfs, who had been so kind
to Snowdrop in her time of need.




THE PINK

There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.
Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to
bestow on her a son or a daughter. Then an angel from heaven came to her
and said: ‘Be at rest, you shall have a son with the power of wishing,
so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall he have.’ Then
she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings, and when the time
was come she gave birth to a son, and the king was filled with gladness.

Every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild
beasts were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream. It
happened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying in
her arms and she fell asleep. Then came the old cook, who knew that the
child had the power of wishing, and stole it away, and he took a hen,
and cut it in pieces, and dropped some of its blood on the queen’s apron
and on her dress. Then he carried the child away to a secret place,
where a nurse was obliged to suckle it, and he ran to the king and
accused the queen of having allowed her child to be taken from her by
the wild beasts. When the king saw the blood on her apron, he believed
this, fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built,
in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into
it, and walled up. Here she was to stay for seven years without meat
or drink, and die of hunger. But God sent two angels from heaven in the
shape of white doves, which flew to her twice a day, and carried her
food until the seven years were over.

The cook, however, thought to himself: ‘If the child has the power of
wishing, and I am here, he might very easily get me into trouble.’ So
he left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough to
speak, and said to him: ‘Wish for a beautiful palace for yourself with
a garden, and all else that pertains to it.’ Scarcely were the words out
of the boy’s mouth, when everything was there that he had wished for.
After a while the cook said to him: ‘It is not well for you to be so
alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.’ Then the king’s son
wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and was more
beautiful than any painter could have painted her. The two played
together, and loved each other with all their hearts, and the old cook
went out hunting like a nobleman. The thought occurred to him, however,
that the king’s son might some day wish to be with his father, and thus
bring him into great peril. So he went out and took the maiden aside,
and said: ‘Tonight when the boy is asleep, go to his bed and plunge this
knife into his heart, and bring me his heart and tongue, and if you do
not do it, you shall lose your life.’ Thereupon he went away, and when
he returned next day she had not done it, and said: ‘Why should I shed
the blood of an innocent boy who has never harmed anyone?’ The cook once
more said: ‘If you do not do it, it shall cost you your own life.’ When
he had gone away, she had a little hind brought to her, and ordered her
to be killed, and took her heart and tongue, and laid them on a plate,
and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the boy: ‘Lie down in
your bed, and draw the clothes over you.’ Then the wicked wretch came in
and said: ‘Where are the boy’s heart and tongue?’ The girl reached the
plate to him, but the king’s son threw off the quilt, and said: ‘You old
sinner, why did you want to kill me? Now will I pronounce thy sentence.
You shall become a black poodle and have a gold collar round your neck,
and shall eat burning coals, till the flames burst forth from your
throat.’ And when he had spoken these words, the old man was changed
into a poodle dog, and had a gold collar round his neck, and the cooks
were ordered to bring up some live coals, and these he ate, until the
flames broke forth from his throat. The king’s son remained there a
short while longer, and he thought of his mother, and wondered if she
were still alive. At length he said to the maiden: ‘I will go home to my
own country; if you will go with me, I will provide for you.’ ‘Ah,’
she replied, ‘the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strange land
where I am unknown?’ As she did not seem quite willing, and as they
could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might be changed
into a beautiful pink, and took her with him. Then he went away to his
own country, and the poodle had to run after him. He went to the tower
in which his mother was confined, and as it was so high, he wished for
a ladder which would reach up to the very top. Then he mounted up and
looked inside, and cried: ‘Beloved mother, Lady Queen, are you still
alive, or are you dead?’ She answered: ‘I have just eaten, and am still
satisfied,’ for she thought the angels were there. Said he: ‘I am your
dear son, whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from your arms;
but I am alive still, and will soon set you free.’ Then he descended
again, and went to his father, and caused himself to be announced as a
strange huntsman, and asked if he could offer him service. The king said
yes, if he was skilful and could get game for him, he should come to
him, but that deer had never taken up their quarters in any part of the
district or country. Then the huntsman promised to procure as much game
for him as he could possibly use at the royal table. So he summoned all
the huntsmen together, and bade them go out into the forest with him.
And he went with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end
where he stationed himself, and began to wish. Two hundred deer and more
came running inside the circle at once, and the huntsmen shot them.
Then they were all placed on sixty country carts, and driven home to the
king, and for once he was able to deck his table with game, after having
had none at all for years.

Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entire
household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. When
they were all assembled together, he said to the huntsman: ‘As you are
so clever, you shall sit by me.’ He replied: ‘Lord King, your majesty
must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.’ But the king insisted on it,
and said: ‘You shall sit by me,’ until he did it. Whilst he was sitting
there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the
king’s principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask how
it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alive still,
or had perished. Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began,
and said: ‘Your majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen
living in the tower? Is she still alive, or has she died?’ But the king
replied: ‘She let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts; I will
not have her named.’ Then the huntsman arose and said: ‘Gracious lord
father she is alive still, and I am her son, and I was not carried away
by wild beasts, but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from her
arms when she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a
chicken.’ Thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar, and said:
‘That is the wretch!’ and caused live coals to be brought, and these the
dog was compelled to devour before the sight of all, until flames burst
forth from its throat. On this the huntsman asked the king if he would
like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into the form
of the cook, in which he stood immediately, with his white apron,
and his knife by his side. When the king saw him he fell into a passion,
and ordered him to be cast into the deepest dungeon. Then the huntsman
spoke further and said: ‘Father, will you see the maiden who brought me
up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murder me, but did not do it,
though her own life depended on it?’ The king replied: ‘Yes, I would
like to see her.’ The son said: ‘Most gracious father, I will show her
to you in the form of a beautiful flower,’ and he thrust his hand into
his pocket and brought forth the pink, and placed it on the royal table,
and it was so beautiful that the king had never seen one to equal it.
Then the son said: ‘Now will I show her to you in her own form,’ and
wished that she might become a maiden, and she stood there looking so
beautiful that no painter could have made her look more so.

And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the tower,
to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table. But when she was
led in she ate nothing, and said: ‘The gracious and merciful God who has
supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.’ She lived three days
more, and then died happily, and when she was buried, the two white
doves which had brought her food to the tower, and were angels of
heaven, followed her body and seated themselves on her grave. The aged
king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces, but grief consumed the
king’s own heart, and he soon died. His son married the beautiful maiden
whom he had brought with him as a flower in his pocket, and whether they
are still alive or not, is known to God.




CLEVER ELSIE

There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie. And
when she had grown up her father said: ‘We will get her married.’ ‘Yes,’
said the mother, ‘if only someone would come who would have her.’ At
length a man came from a distance and wooed her, who was called Hans;
but he stipulated that Clever Elsie should be really smart. ‘Oh,’ said
the father, ‘she has plenty of good sense’; and the mother said: ‘Oh,
she can see the wind coming up the street, and hear the flies coughing.’
‘Well,’ said Hans, ‘if she is not really smart, I won’t have her.’ When
they were sitting at dinner and had eaten, the mother said: ‘Elsie, go
into the cellar and fetch some beer.’ Then Clever Elsie took the pitcher
from the wall, went into the cellar, and tapped the lid briskly as she
went, so that the time might not appear long. When she was below she
fetched herself a chair, and set it before the barrel so that she had
no need to stoop, and did not hurt her back or do herself any unexpected
injury. Then she placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and
while the beer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but
looked up at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw a
pick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentally left
there.

Then Clever Elsie began to weep and said: ‘If I get Hans, and we have
a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar here to draw
beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then she
sat and wept and screamed with all the strength of her body, over the
misfortune which lay before her. Those upstairs waited for the drink,
but Clever Elsie still did not come. Then the woman said to the servant:
‘Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie is.’ The maid went and
found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly. ‘Elsie why
do you weep?’ asked the maid. ‘Ah,’ she answered, ‘have I not reason to
weep? If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to
draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on his head, and kill
him.’ Then said the maid: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down
beside her and began loudly to weep over the misfortune. After a while,
as the maid did not come back, and those upstairs were thirsty for the
beer, the man said to the boy: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie and the girl are.’ The boy went down, and there sat Clever
Elsie and the girl both weeping together. Then he asked: ‘Why are you
weeping?’ ‘Ah,’ said Elsie, ‘have I not reason to weep? If I get Hans,
and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the
pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then said the boy: ‘What
a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down by her, and likewise began to
howl loudly. Upstairs they waited for the boy, but as he still did not
return, the man said to the woman: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie is!’ The woman went down, and found all three in the midst
of their lamentations, and inquired what was the cause; then Elsie told
her also that her future child was to be killed by the pick-axe, when it
grew big and had to draw beer, and the pick-axe fell down. Then said the
mother likewise: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down and wept
with them. The man upstairs waited a short time, but as his wife did not
come back and his thirst grew ever greater, he said: ‘I must go into the
cellar myself and see where Elsie is.’ But when he got into the cellar,
and they were all sitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and
that Elsie’s child was the cause, and the Elsie might perhaps bring one
into the world some day, and that he might be killed by the pick-axe, if
he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawing beer just at the very
time when it fell down, he cried: ‘Oh, what a clever Elsie!’ and sat
down, and likewise wept with them. The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone
for a long time; then as no one would come back he thought: ‘They must be
waiting for me below: I too must go there and see what they are about.’
When he got down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting
quite piteously, each out-doing the other. ‘What misfortune has happened
then?’ asked he. ‘Ah, dear Hans,’ said Elsie, ‘if we marry each other
and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps send him here to draw
something to drink, then the pick-axe which has been left up there might
dash his brains out if it were to fall down, so have we not reason to
weep?’ ‘Come,’ said Hans, ‘more understanding than that is not needed
for my household, as you are such a clever Elsie, I will have you,’ and
seized her hand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.

After Hans had had her some time, he said: ‘Wife, I am going out to work
and earn some money for us; go into the field and cut the corn that we
may have some bread.’ ‘Yes, dear Hans, I will do that.’ After Hans had
gone away, she cooked herself some good broth and took it into the field
with her. When she came to the field she said to herself: ‘What shall I
do; shall I cut first, or shall I eat first? Oh, I will eat first.’ Then
she drank her cup of broth and when she was fully satisfied, she once
more said: ‘What shall I do? Shall I cut first, or shall I sleep first?
I will sleep first.’ Then she lay down among the corn and fell asleep.
Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come; then said
he: ‘What a clever Elsie I have; she is so industrious that she does not
even come home to eat.’ But when evening came and she still stayed away,
Hans went out to see what she had cut, but nothing was cut, and she
was lying among the corn asleep. Then Hans hastened home and brought
a fowler’s net with little bells and hung it round about her, and she
still went on sleeping. Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and sat
down in his chair and worked. At length, when it was quite dark, Clever
Elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling all round about
her, and the bells rang at each step which she took. Then she was
alarmed, and became uncertain whether she really was Clever Elsie or
not, and said: ‘Is it I, or is it not I?’ But she knew not what answer
to make to this, and stood for a time in doubt; at length she thought:
‘I will go home and ask if it be I, or if it be not I, they will be sure
to know.’ She ran to the door of her own house, but it was shut; then
she knocked at the window and cried: ‘Hans, is Elsie within?’ ‘Yes,’
answered Hans, ‘she is within.’ Hereupon she was terrified, and said:
‘Ah, heavens! Then it is not I,’ and went to another door; but when the
people heard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and she
could get in nowhere. Then she ran out of the village, and no one has
seen her since.




THE MISER IN THE BUSH

A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for
him three years, without having been paid any wages. At last it came
into the man’s head that he would not go on thus without pay any longer;
so he went to his master, and said, ‘I have worked hard for you a long
time, I will trust to you to give me what I deserve to have for my
trouble.’ The farmer was a sad miser, and knew that his man was very
simple-hearted; so he took out threepence, and gave him for every year’s
service a penny. The poor fellow thought it was a great deal of money to
have, and said to himself, ‘Why should I work hard, and live here on bad
fare any longer? I can now travel into the wide world, and make myself
merry.’ With that he put his money into his purse, and set out, roaming
over hill and valley.

As he jogged along over the fields, singing and dancing, a little dwarf
met him, and asked him what made him so merry. ‘Why, what should make
me down-hearted?’ said he; ‘I am sound in health and rich in purse, what
should I care for? I have saved up my three years’ earnings and have it
all safe in my pocket.’ ‘How much may it come to?’ said the little man.
‘Full threepence,’ replied the countryman. ‘I wish you would give them
to me,’ said the other; ‘I am very poor.’ Then the man pitied him, and
gave him all he had; and the little dwarf said in return, ‘As you have
such a kind honest heart, I will grant you three wishes--one for every
penny; so choose whatever you like.’ Then the countryman rejoiced at
his good luck, and said, ‘I like many things better than money: first, I
will have a bow that will bring down everything I shoot at; secondly,
a fiddle that will set everyone dancing that hears me play upon it; and
thirdly, I should like that everyone should grant what I ask.’ The dwarf
said he should have his three wishes; so he gave him the bow and fiddle,
and went his way.

Our honest friend journeyed on his way too; and if he was merry before,
he was now ten times more so. He had not gone far before he met an old
miser: close by them stood a tree, and on the topmost twig sat a thrush
singing away most joyfully. ‘Oh, what a pretty bird!’ said the miser; ‘I
would give a great deal of money to have such a one.’ ‘If that’s all,’
said the countryman, ‘I will soon bring it down.’ Then he took up his
bow, and down fell the thrush into the bushes at the foot of the tree.
The miser crept into the bush to find it; but directly he had got into
the middle, his companion took up his fiddle and played away, and the
miser began to dance and spring about, capering higher and higher in
the air. The thorns soon began to tear his clothes till they all hung
in rags about him, and he himself was all scratched and wounded, so that
the blood ran down. ‘Oh, for heaven’s sake!’ cried the miser, ‘Master!
master! pray let the fiddle alone. What have I done to deserve this?’
‘Thou hast shaved many a poor soul close enough,’ said the other; ‘thou
art only meeting thy reward’: so he played up another tune. Then the
miser began to beg and promise, and offered money for his liberty; but
he did not come up to the musician’s price for some time, and he danced
him along brisker and brisker, and the miser bid higher and higher, till
at last he offered a round hundred of florins that he had in his purse,
and had just gained by cheating some poor fellow. When the countryman
saw so much money, he said, ‘I will agree to your proposal.’ So he took
the purse, put up his fiddle, and travelled on very pleased with his
bargain.

Meanwhile the miser crept out of the bush half-naked and in a piteous
plight, and began to ponder how he should take his revenge, and serve
his late companion some trick. At last he went to the judge, and
complained that a rascal had robbed him of his money, and beaten him
into the bargain; and that the fellow who did it carried a bow at his
back and a fiddle hung round his neck. Then the judge sent out his
officers to bring up the accused wherever they should find him; and he
was soon caught and brought up to be tried.

The miser began to tell his tale, and said he had been robbed of
his money. ‘No, you gave it me for playing a tune to you.’ said the
countryman; but the judge told him that was not likely, and cut the
matter short by ordering him off to the gallows.

So away he was taken; but as he stood on the steps he said, ‘My Lord
Judge, grant me one last request.’ ‘Anything but thy life,’ replied the
other. ‘No,’ said he, ‘I do not ask my life; only to let me play upon
my fiddle for the last time.’ The miser cried out, ‘Oh, no! no! for
heaven’s sake don’t listen to him! don’t listen to him!’ But the judge
said, ‘It is only this once, he will soon have done.’ The fact was, he
could not refuse the request, on account of the dwarf’s third gift.

Then the miser said, ‘Bind me fast, bind me fast, for pity’s sake.’ But
the countryman seized his fiddle, and struck up a tune, and at the first
note judge, clerks, and jailer were in motion; all began capering, and
no one could hold the miser. At the second note the hangman let his
prisoner go, and danced also, and by the time he had played the first
bar of the tune, all were dancing together--judge, court, and miser, and
all the people who had followed to look on. At first the thing was merry
and pleasant enough; but when it had gone on a while, and there seemed
to be no end of playing or dancing, they began to cry out, and beg him
to leave off; but he stopped not a whit the more for their entreaties,
till the judge not only gave him his life, but promised to return him
the hundred florins.

Then he called to the miser, and said, ‘Tell us now, you vagabond, where
you got that gold, or I shall play on for your amusement only,’ ‘I stole
it,’ said the miser in the presence of all the people; ‘I acknowledge
that I stole it, and that you earned it fairly.’ Then the countryman
stopped his fiddle, and left the miser to take his place at the gallows.




ASHPUTTEL

The wife of a rich man fell sick; and when she felt that her end drew
nigh, she called her only daughter to her bed-side, and said, ‘Always be
a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you.’ Soon
afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the garden;
and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept, and was always
good and kind to all about her. And the snow fell and spread a beautiful
white covering over the grave; but by the time the spring came, and the
sun had melted it away again, her father had married another wife. This
new wife had two daughters of her own, that she brought home with her;
they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it was now a sorry time
for the poor little girl. ‘What does the good-for-nothing want in the
parlour?’ said they; ‘they who would eat bread should first earn it;
away with the kitchen-maid!’ Then they took away her fine clothes, and
gave her an old grey frock to put on, and laughed at her, and turned her
into the kitchen.

There she was forced to do hard work; to rise early before daylight, to
bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash. Besides that,
the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways, and laughed at her. In the
evening when she was tired, she had no bed to lie down on, but was made
to lie by the hearth among the ashes; and as this, of course, made her
always dusty and dirty, they called her Ashputtel.

It happened once that the father was going to the fair, and asked his
wife’s daughters what he should bring them. ‘Fine clothes,’ said the
first; ‘Pearls and diamonds,’ cried the second. ‘Now, child,’ said he
to his own daughter, ‘what will you have?’ ‘The first twig, dear
father, that brushes against your hat when you turn your face to come
homewards,’ said she. Then he bought for the first two the fine clothes
and pearls and diamonds they had asked for: and on his way home, as he
rode through a green copse, a hazel twig brushed against him, and almost
pushed off his hat: so he broke it off and brought it away; and when he
got home he gave it to his daughter. Then she took it, and went to
her mother’s grave and planted it there; and cried so much that it was
watered with her tears; and there it grew and became a fine tree. Three
times every day she went to it and cried; and soon a little bird came
and built its nest upon the tree, and talked with her, and watched over
her, and brought her whatever she wished for.

Now it happened that the king of that land held a feast, which was to
last three days; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose
a bride for himself. Ashputtel’s two sisters were asked to come; so they
called her up, and said, ‘Now, comb our hair, brush our shoes, and tie
our sashes for us, for we are going to dance at the king’s feast.’
Then she did as she was told; but when all was done she could not help
crying, for she thought to herself, she should so have liked to have
gone with them to the ball; and at last she begged her mother very hard
to let her go. ‘You, Ashputtel!’ said she; ‘you who have nothing to
wear, no clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to
the ball? And when she kept on begging, she said at last, to get rid of
her, ‘I will throw this dishful of peas into the ash-heap, and if in
two hours’ time you have picked them all out, you shall go to the feast
too.’

Then she threw the peas down among the ashes, but the little maiden ran
out at the back door into the garden, and cried out:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves, flying in at the kitchen window; next
came two turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under
heaven, chirping and fluttering in: and they flew down into the ashes.
And the little doves stooped their heads down and set to work, pick,
pick, pick; and then the others began to pick, pick, pick: and among
them all they soon picked out all the good grain, and put it into a dish
but left the ashes. Long before the end of the hour the work was quite
done, and all flew out again at the windows.

Then Ashputtel brought the dish to her mother, overjoyed at the thought
that now she should go to the ball. But the mother said, ‘No, no! you
slut, you have no clothes, and cannot dance; you shall not go.’ And when
Ashputtel begged very hard to go, she said, ‘If you can in one hour’s
time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes, you shall go
too.’ And thus she thought she should at least get rid of her. So she
shook two dishes of peas into the ashes.

But the little maiden went out into the garden at the back of the house,
and cried out as before:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window; next came two
turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under heaven,
chirping and hopping about. And they flew down into the ashes; and the
little doves put their heads down and set to work, pick, pick, pick; and
then the others began pick, pick, pick; and they put all the good grain
into the dishes, and left all the ashes. Before half an hour’s time all
was done, and out they flew again. And then Ashputtel took the dishes to
her mother, rejoicing to think that she should now go to the ball.
But her mother said, ‘It is all of no use, you cannot go; you have no
clothes, and cannot dance, and you would only put us to shame’: and off
she went with her two daughters to the ball.

Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Ashputtel went
sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree, and brought a gold and
silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them
on, and followed her sisters to the feast. But they did not know her,
and thought it must be some strange princess, she looked so fine and
beautiful in her rich clothes; and they never once thought of Ashputtel,
taking it for granted that she was safe at home in the dirt.

The king’s son soon came up to her, and took her by the hand and danced
with her, and no one else: and he never left her hand; but when anyone
else came to ask her to dance, he said, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

Thus they danced till a late hour of the night; and then she wanted to
go home: and the king’s son said, ‘I shall go and take care of you to
your home’; for he wanted to see where the beautiful maiden lived. But
she slipped away from him, unawares, and ran off towards home; and as
the prince followed her, she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut
the door. Then he waited till her father came home, and told him that
the unknown maiden, who had been at the feast, had hid herself in the
pigeon-house. But when they had broken open the door they found no one
within; and as they came back into the house, Ashputtel was lying, as
she always did, in her dirty frock by the ashes, and her dim little
lamp was burning in the chimney. For she had run as quickly as she could
through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree, and had there taken
off her beautiful clothes, and put them beneath the tree, that the bird
might carry them away, and had lain down again amid the ashes in her
little grey frock.

The next day when the feast was again held, and her father, mother, and
sisters were gone, Ashputtel went to the hazel-tree, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

And the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she
had worn the day before. And when she came in it to the ball, everyone
wondered at her beauty: but the king’s son, who was waiting for her,
took her by the hand, and danced with her; and when anyone asked her to
dance, he said as before, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son followed here
as before, that he might see into what house she went: but she sprang
away from him all at once into the garden behind her father’s house.
In this garden stood a fine large pear-tree full of ripe fruit; and
Ashputtel, not knowing where to hide herself, jumped up into it without
being seen. Then the king’s son lost sight of her, and could not find
out where she was gone, but waited till her father came home, and said
to him, ‘The unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away, and I
think she must have sprung into the pear-tree.’ The father thought to
himself, ‘Can it be Ashputtel?’ So he had an axe brought; and they cut
down the tree, but found no one upon it. And when they came back into
the kitchen, there lay Ashputtel among the ashes; for she had slipped
down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful clothes
back to the bird at the hazel-tree, and then put on her little grey
frock.

The third day, when her father and mother and sisters were gone, she
went again into the garden, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the
former one, and slippers which were all of gold: so that when she came
to the feast no one knew what to say, for wonder at her beauty: and the
king’s son danced with nobody but her; and when anyone else asked her to
dance, he said, ‘This lady is _my_ partner, sir.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son would go with
her, and said to himself, ‘I will not lose her this time’; but, however,
she again slipped away from him, though in such a hurry that she dropped
her left golden slipper upon the stairs.

The prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king his father,
and said, ‘I will take for my wife the lady that this golden slipper
fits.’ Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear it; for they
had beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the golden
slipper. The eldest went first into the room where the slipper was, and
wanted to try it on, and the mother stood by. But her great toe could
not go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small for her. Then
the mother gave her a knife, and said, ‘Never mind, cut it off; when you
are queen you will not care about toes; you will not want to walk.’ So
the silly girl cut off her great toe, and thus squeezed on the shoe,
and went to the king’s son. Then he took her for his bride, and set her
beside him on his horse, and rode away with her homewards.

But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that Ashputtel
had planted; and on the branch sat a little dove singing:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then the prince got down and looked at her foot; and he saw, by the
blood that streamed from it, what a trick she had played him. So he
turned his horse round, and brought the false bride back to her home,
and said, ‘This is not the right bride; let the other sister try and put
on the slipper.’ Then she went into the room and got her foot into the
shoe, all but the heel, which was too large. But her mother squeezed it
in till the blood came, and took her to the king’s son: and he set her
as his bride by his side on his horse, and rode away with her.

But when they came to the hazel-tree the little dove sat there still,
and sang:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then he looked down, and saw that the blood streamed so much from the
shoe, that her white stockings were quite red. So he turned his horse
and brought her also back again. ‘This is not the true bride,’ said he
to the father; ‘have you no other daughters?’ ‘No,’ said he; ‘there is
only a little dirty Ashputtel here, the child of my first wife; I am
sure she cannot be the bride.’ The prince told him to send her. But the
mother said, ‘No, no, she is much too dirty; she will not dare to show
herself.’ However, the prince would have her come; and she first washed
her face and hands, and then went in and curtsied to him, and he reached
her the golden slipper. Then she took her clumsy shoe off her left foot,
and put on the golden slipper; and it fitted her as if it had been made
for her. And when he drew near and looked at her face he knew her, and
said, ‘This is the right bride.’ But the mother and both the sisters
were frightened, and turned pale with anger as he took Ashputtel on his
horse, and rode away with her. And when they came to the hazel-tree, the
white dove sang:

 ‘Home! home! look at the shoe!
  Princess! the shoe was made for you!
  Prince! prince! take home thy bride,
  For she is the true one that sits by thy side!’

And when the dove had done its song, it came flying, and perched upon
her right shoulder, and so went home with her.




THE WHITE SNAKE

A long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdom through
all the land. Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed as if news of
the most secret things was brought to him through the air. But he had a
strange custom; every day after dinner, when the table was cleared,
and no one else was present, a trusty servant had to bring him one more
dish. It was covered, however, and even the servant did not know what
was in it, neither did anyone know, for the king never took off the
cover to eat of it until he was quite alone.

This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who took
away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help
carrying the dish into his room. When he had carefully locked the door,
he lifted up the cover, and saw a white snake lying on the dish. But
when he saw it he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it,
so he cut of a little bit and put it into his mouth. No sooner had it
touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices
outside his window. He went and listened, and then noticed that it was
the sparrows who were chattering together, and telling one another of
all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields and woods. Eating
the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals.

Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most
beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty
servant, who was allowed to go everywhere. The king ordered the man to
be brought before him, and threatened with angry words that unless he
could before the morrow point out the thief, he himself should be looked
upon as guilty and executed. In vain he declared his innocence; he was
dismissed with no better answer.

In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought
how to help himself out of his trouble. Now some ducks were sitting
together quietly by a brook and taking their rest; and, whilst they
were making their feathers smooth with their bills, they were having a
confidential conversation together. The servant stood by and listened.
They were telling one another of all the places where they had been
waddling about all the morning, and what good food they had found; and
one said in a pitiful tone: ‘Something lies heavy on my stomach; as
I was eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under the queen’s
window.’ The servant at once seized her by the neck, carried her to the
kitchen, and said to the cook: ‘Here is a fine duck; pray, kill her.’
‘Yes,’ said the cook, and weighed her in his hand; ‘she has spared
no trouble to fatten herself, and has been waiting to be roasted long
enough.’ So he cut off her head, and as she was being dressed for the
spit, the queen’s ring was found inside her.

The servant could now easily prove his innocence; and the king, to make
amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favour, and promised him
the best place in the court that he could wish for. The servant refused
everything, and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling, as
he had a mind to see the world and go about a little. When his request
was granted he set out on his way, and one day came to a pond, where he
saw three fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water. Now, though
it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must
perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart, he got off his
horse and put the three prisoners back into the water. They leapt with
delight, put out their heads, and cried to him: ‘We will remember you
and repay you for saving us!’

He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in
the sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an ant-king complain: ‘Why
cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep off our bodies? That stupid
horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been treading down my people without
mercy!’ So he turned on to a side path and the ant-king cried out to
him: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves another!’

The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing
by their nest, and throwing out their young ones. ‘Out with you, you
idle, good-for-nothing creatures!’ cried they; ‘we cannot find food for
you any longer; you are big enough, and can provide for yourselves.’
But the poor young ravens lay upon the ground, flapping their wings, and
crying: ‘Oh, what helpless chicks we are! We must shift for ourselves,
and yet we cannot fly! What can we do, but lie here and starve?’ So the
good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword, and gave
it to them for food. Then they came hopping up to it, satisfied their
hunger, and cried: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves
another!’

And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a long
way, he came to a large city. There was a great noise and crowd in
the streets, and a man rode up on horseback, crying aloud: ‘The king’s
daughter wants a husband; but whoever seeks her hand must perform a hard
task, and if he does not succeed he will forfeit his life.’ Many had
already made the attempt, but in vain; nevertheless when the youth
saw the king’s daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty that he
forgot all danger, went before the king, and declared himself a suitor.

So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into it, before
his eyes; then the king ordered him to fetch this ring up from the
bottom of the sea, and added: ‘If you come up again without it you will
be thrown in again and again until you perish amid the waves.’ All the
people grieved for the handsome youth; then they went away, leaving him
alone by the sea.

He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when suddenly
he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and they were the very
fishes whose lives he had saved. The one in the middle held a mussel in
its mouth, which it laid on the shore at the youth’s feet, and when he
had taken it up and opened it, there lay the gold ring in the shell.
Full of joy he took it to the king and expected that he would grant him
the promised reward.

But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal in
birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform another
task. She went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten
sacksful of millet-seed on the grass; then she said: ‘Tomorrow morning
before sunrise these must be picked up, and not a single grain be
wanting.’

The youth sat down in the garden and considered how it might be possible
to perform this task, but he could think of nothing, and there he sat
sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, when he should be led to death.
But as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden he saw
all the ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single
grain was missing. The ant-king had come in the night with thousands
and thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry
picked up all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.

Presently the king’s daughter herself came down into the garden, and was
amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given him.
But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said: ‘Although he
has performed both the tasks, he shall not be my husband until he had
brought me an apple from the Tree of Life.’ The youth did not know where
the Tree of Life stood, but he set out, and would have gone on for ever,
as long as his legs would carry him, though he had no hope of finding
it. After he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to
a wood, and lay down under a tree to sleep. But he heard a rustling in
the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same time
three ravens flew down to him, perched themselves upon his knee, and
said: ‘We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starving; when
we had grown big, and heard that you were seeking the Golden Apple,
we flew over the sea to the end of the world, where the Tree of Life
stands, and have brought you the apple.’ The youth, full of joy, set out
homewards, and took the Golden Apple to the king’s beautiful daughter,
who had now no more excuses left to make. They cut the Apple of Life in
two and ate it together; and then her heart became full of love for him,
and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.




THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS

There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One day she
wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she called all
seven to her and said: ‘Dear children, I have to go into the forest,
be on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he will devour you
all--skin, hair, and everything. The wretch often disguises himself, but
you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black feet.’ The
kids said: ‘Dear mother, we will take good care of ourselves; you may go
away without any anxiety.’ Then the old one bleated, and went on her way
with an easy mind.

It was not long before someone knocked at the house-door and called:
‘Open the door, dear children; your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.’ But the little kids knew that
it was the wolf, by the rough voice. ‘We will not open the door,’ cried
they, ‘you are not our mother. She has a soft, pleasant voice, but
your voice is rough; you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf went away to a
shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this and made
his voice soft with it. Then he came back, knocked at the door of the
house, and called: ‘Open the door, dear children, your mother is here
and has brought something back with her for each of you.’ But the wolf
had laid his black paws against the window, and the children saw them
and cried: ‘We will not open the door, our mother has not black feet
like you: you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf ran to a baker and said: ‘I
have hurt my feet, rub some dough over them for me.’ And when the baker
had rubbed his feet over, he ran to the miller and said: ‘Strew some
white meal over my feet for me.’ The miller thought to himself: ‘The
wolf wants to deceive someone,’ and refused; but the wolf said: ‘If you
will not do it, I will devour you.’ Then the miller was afraid, and made
his paws white for him. Truly, this is the way of mankind.

So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked at
it and said: ‘Open the door for me, children, your dear little mother
has come home, and has brought every one of you something back from the
forest with her.’ The little kids cried: ‘First show us your paws that
we may know if you are our dear little mother.’ Then he put his paws
in through the window and when the kids saw that they were white, they
believed that all he said was true, and opened the door. But who should
come in but the wolf! They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves.
One sprang under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the
stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the
sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But
the wolf found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after the
other he swallowed them down his throat. The youngest, who was in
the clock-case, was the only one he did not find. When the wolf had
satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid himself down under a
tree in the green meadow outside, and began to sleep. Soon afterwards
the old goat came home again from the forest. Ah! what a sight she saw
there! The house-door stood wide open. The table, chairs, and benches
were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts
and pillows were pulled off the bed. She sought her children, but they
were nowhere to be found. She called them one after another by name, but
no one answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice
cried: ‘Dear mother, I am in the clock-case.’ She took the kid out, and
it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others. Then
you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.

At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with her.
When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree and snored
so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him on every side and
saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged belly. ‘Ah,
heavens,’ she said, ‘is it possible that my poor children whom he has
swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?’ Then the kid had to
run home and fetch scissors, and a needle and thread, and the goat cut
open the monster’s stomach, and hardly had she made one cut, than one
little kid thrust its head out, and when she had cut farther, all six
sprang out one after another, and were all still alive, and had suffered
no injury whatever, for in his greediness the monster had swallowed them
down whole. What rejoicing there was! They embraced their dear mother,
and jumped like a tailor at his wedding. The mother, however, said: ‘Now
go and look for some big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast’s
stomach with them while he is still asleep.’ Then the seven kids dragged
the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them into this
stomach as they could get in; and the mother sewed him up again in the
greatest haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once
stirred.

When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on his legs,
and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted to
go to a well to drink. But when he began to walk and to move about, the
stones in his stomach knocked against each other and rattled. Then cried
he:

 ‘What rumbles and tumbles
  Against my poor bones?
  I thought ‘twas six kids,
  But it feels like big stones.’

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones made him fall in, and he drowned miserably. When the seven
kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried aloud: ‘The wolf
is dead! The wolf is dead!’ and danced for joy round about the well with
their mother.




THE QUEEN BEE

Two kings’ sons once upon a time went into the world to seek their
fortunes; but they soon fell into a wasteful foolish way of living, so
that they could not return home again. Then their brother, who was a
little insignificant dwarf, went out to seek for his brothers: but when
he had found them they only laughed at him, to think that he, who was so
young and simple, should try to travel through the world, when they, who
were so much wiser, had been unable to get on. However, they all set
out on their journey together, and came at last to an ant-hill. The two
elder brothers would have pulled it down, in order to see how the poor
ants in their fright would run about and carry off their eggs. But the
little dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, I will not
suffer you to trouble them.’

So on they went, and came to a lake where many many ducks were swimming
about. The two brothers wanted to catch two, and roast them. But the
dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, you shall not kill
them.’ Next they came to a bees’-nest in a hollow tree, and there was
so much honey that it ran down the trunk; and the two brothers wanted to
light a fire under the tree and kill the bees, so as to get their honey.
But the dwarf held them back, and said, ‘Let the pretty insects enjoy
themselves, I cannot let you burn them.’

At length the three brothers came to a castle: and as they passed by the
stables they saw fine horses standing there, but all were of marble, and
no man was to be seen. Then they went through all the rooms, till they
came to a door on which were three locks: but in the middle of the door
was a wicket, so that they could look into the next room. There they saw
a little grey old man sitting at a table; and they called to him once or
twice, but he did not hear: however, they called a third time, and then
he rose and came out to them.

He said nothing, but took hold of them and led them to a beautiful
table covered with all sorts of good things: and when they had eaten and
drunk, he showed each of them to a bed-chamber.

The next morning he came to the eldest and took him to a marble table,
where there were three tablets, containing an account of the means by
which the castle might be disenchanted. The first tablet said: ‘In the
wood, under the moss, lie the thousand pearls belonging to the king’s
daughter; they must all be found: and if one be missing by set of sun,
he who seeks them will be turned into marble.’

The eldest brother set out, and sought for the pearls the whole day:
but the evening came, and he had not found the first hundred: so he was
turned into stone as the tablet had foretold.

The next day the second brother undertook the task; but he succeeded no
better than the first; for he could only find the second hundred of the
pearls; and therefore he too was turned into stone.

At last came the little dwarf’s turn; and he looked in the moss; but it
was so hard to find the pearls, and the job was so tiresome!--so he sat
down upon a stone and cried. And as he sat there, the king of the ants
(whose life he had saved) came to help him, with five thousand ants; and
it was not long before they had found all the pearls and laid them in a
heap.

The second tablet said: ‘The key of the princess’s bed-chamber must be
fished up out of the lake.’ And as the dwarf came to the brink of it,
he saw the two ducks whose lives he had saved swimming about; and they
dived down and soon brought in the key from the bottom.

The third task was the hardest. It was to choose out the youngest and
the best of the king’s three daughters. Now they were all beautiful, and
all exactly alike: but he was told that the eldest had eaten a piece of
sugar, the next some sweet syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey;
so he was to guess which it was that had eaten the honey.

Then came the queen of the bees, who had been saved by the little dwarf
from the fire, and she tried the lips of all three; but at last she sat
upon the lips of the one that had eaten the honey: and so the dwarf knew
which was the youngest. Thus the spell was broken, and all who had been
turned into stones awoke, and took their proper forms. And the dwarf
married the youngest and the best of the princesses, and was king after
her father’s death; but his two brothers married the other two sisters.




THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

There was once a shoemaker, who worked very hard and was very honest:
but still he could not earn enough to live upon; and at last all he
had in the world was gone, save just leather enough to make one pair of
shoes.

Then he cut his leather out, all ready to make up the next day, meaning
to rise early in the morning to his work. His conscience was clear and
his heart light amidst all his troubles; so he went peaceably to bed,
left all his cares to Heaven, and soon fell asleep. In the morning after
he had said his prayers, he sat himself down to his work; when, to his
great wonder, there stood the shoes all ready made, upon the table. The
good man knew not what to say or think at such an odd thing happening.
He looked at the workmanship; there was not one false stitch in the
whole job; all was so neat and true, that it was quite a masterpiece.

The same day a customer came in, and the shoes suited him so well that
he willingly paid a price higher than usual for them; and the poor
shoemaker, with the money, bought leather enough to make two pairs more.
In the evening he cut out the work, and went to bed early, that he might
get up and begin betimes next day; but he was saved all the trouble, for
when he got up in the morning the work was done ready to his hand. Soon
in came buyers, who paid him handsomely for his goods, so that he bought
leather enough for four pair more. He cut out the work again overnight
and found it done in the morning, as before; and so it went on for some
time: what was got ready in the evening was always done by daybreak, and
the good man soon became thriving and well off again.

One evening, about Christmas-time, as he and his wife were sitting over
the fire chatting together, he said to her, ‘I should like to sit up and
watch tonight, that we may see who it is that comes and does my work for
me.’ The wife liked the thought; so they left a light burning, and hid
themselves in a corner of the room, behind a curtain that was hung up
there, and watched what would happen.

As soon as it was midnight, there came in two little naked dwarfs; and
they sat themselves upon the shoemaker’s bench, took up all the work
that was cut out, and began to ply with their little fingers, stitching
and rapping and tapping away at such a rate, that the shoemaker was all
wonder, and could not take his eyes off them. And on they went, till the
job was quite done, and the shoes stood ready for use upon the table.
This was long before daybreak; and then they bustled away as quick as
lightning.

The next day the wife said to the shoemaker. ‘These little wights have
made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them, and do them a good
turn if we can. I am quite sorry to see them run about as they do; and
indeed it is not very decent, for they have nothing upon their backs to
keep off the cold. I’ll tell you what, I will make each of them a shirt,
and a coat and waistcoat, and a pair of pantaloons into the bargain; and
do you make each of them a little pair of shoes.’

The thought pleased the good cobbler very much; and one evening, when
all the things were ready, they laid them on the table, instead of the
work that they used to cut out, and then went and hid themselves, to
watch what the little elves would do.

About midnight in they came, dancing and skipping, hopped round the
room, and then went to sit down to their work as usual; but when they
saw the clothes lying for them, they laughed and chuckled, and seemed
mightily delighted.

Then they dressed themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and danced and
capered and sprang about, as merry as could be; till at last they danced
out at the door, and away over the green.

The good couple saw them no more; but everything went well with them
from that time forward, as long as they lived.




THE JUNIPER-TREE

Long, long ago, some two thousand years or so, there lived a rich
man with a good and beautiful wife. They loved each other dearly, but
sorrowed much that they had no children. So greatly did they desire
to have one, that the wife prayed for it day and night, but still they
remained childless.

In front of the house there was a court, in which grew a juniper-tree.
One winter’s day the wife stood under the tree to peel some apples, and
as she was peeling them, she cut her finger, and the blood fell on the
snow. ‘Ah,’ sighed the woman heavily, ‘if I had but a child, as red as
blood and as white as snow,’ and as she spoke the words, her heart grew
light within her, and it seemed to her that her wish was granted, and
she returned to the house feeling glad and comforted. A month passed,
and the snow had all disappeared; then another month went by, and all
the earth was green. So the months followed one another, and first the
trees budded in the woods, and soon the green branches grew thickly
intertwined, and then the blossoms began to fall. Once again the wife
stood under the juniper-tree, and it was so full of sweet scent that her
heart leaped for joy, and she was so overcome with her happiness, that
she fell on her knees. Presently the fruit became round and firm, and
she was glad and at peace; but when they were fully ripe she picked the
berries and ate eagerly of them, and then she grew sad and ill. A little
while later she called her husband, and said to him, weeping. ‘If I
die, bury me under the juniper-tree.’ Then she felt comforted and happy
again, and before another month had passed she had a little child, and
when she saw that it was as white as snow and as red as blood, her joy
was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the juniper-tree, and wept bitterly for
her. By degrees, however, his sorrow grew less, and although at times he
still grieved over his loss, he was able to go about as usual, and later
on he married again.

He now had a little daughter born to him; the child of his first wife
was a boy, who was as red as blood and as white as snow. The mother
loved her daughter very much, and when she looked at her and then looked
at the boy, it pierced her heart to think that he would always stand in
the way of her own child, and she was continually thinking how she could
get the whole of the property for her. This evil thought took possession
of her more and more, and made her behave very unkindly to the boy. She
drove him from place to place with cuffings and buffetings, so that the
poor child went about in fear, and had no peace from the time he left
school to the time he went back.

One day the little daughter came running to her mother in the
store-room, and said, ‘Mother, give me an apple.’ ‘Yes, my child,’ said
the wife, and she gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest; the chest
had a very heavy lid and a large iron lock.

‘Mother,’ said the little daughter again, ‘may not brother have one
too?’ The mother was angry at this, but she answered, ‘Yes, when he
comes out of school.’

Just then she looked out of the window and saw him coming, and it seemed
as if an evil spirit entered into her, for she snatched the apple out
of her little daughter’s hand, and said, ‘You shall not have one before
your brother.’ She threw the apple into the chest and shut it to. The
little boy now came in, and the evil spirit in the wife made her say
kindly to him, ‘My son, will you have an apple?’ but she gave him a
wicked look. ‘Mother,’ said the boy, ‘how dreadful you look! Yes, give
me an apple.’ The thought came to her that she would kill him. ‘Come
with me,’ she said, and she lifted up the lid of the chest; ‘take one
out for yourself.’ And as he bent over to do so, the evil spirit urged
her, and crash! down went the lid, and off went the little boy’s head.
Then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done.
‘If only I can prevent anyone knowing that I did it,’ she thought. So
she went upstairs to her room, and took a white handkerchief out of
her top drawer; then she set the boy’s head again on his shoulders, and
bound it with the handkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and placed
him on a chair by the door with an apple in his hand.

Soon after this, little Marleen came up to her mother who was stirring
a pot of boiling water over the fire, and said, ‘Mother, brother is
sitting by the door with an apple in his hand, and he looks so pale;
and when I asked him to give me the apple, he did not answer, and that
frightened me.’

‘Go to him again,’ said her mother, ‘and if he does not answer, give him
a box on the ear.’ So little Marleen went, and said, ‘Brother, give me
that apple,’ but he did not say a word; then she gave him a box on the
ear, and his head rolled off. She was so terrified at this, that she ran
crying and screaming to her mother. ‘Oh!’ she said, ‘I have knocked off
brother’s head,’ and then she wept and wept, and nothing would stop her.

‘What have you done!’ said her mother, ‘but no one must know about it,
so you must keep silence; what is done can’t be undone; we will make
him into puddings.’ And she took the little boy and cut him up, made him
into puddings, and put him in the pot. But Marleen stood looking on,
and wept and wept, and her tears fell into the pot, so that there was no
need of salt.

Presently the father came home and sat down to his dinner; he asked,
‘Where is my son?’ The mother said nothing, but gave him a large dish of
black pudding, and Marleen still wept without ceasing.

The father again asked, ‘Where is my son?’

‘Oh,’ answered the wife, ‘he is gone into the country to his mother’s
great uncle; he is going to stay there some time.’

‘What has he gone there for, and he never even said goodbye to me!’

‘Well, he likes being there, and he told me he should be away quite six
weeks; he is well looked after there.’

‘I feel very unhappy about it,’ said the husband, ‘in case it should not
be all right, and he ought to have said goodbye to me.’

With this he went on with his dinner, and said, ‘Little Marleen, why do
you weep? Brother will soon be back.’ Then he asked his wife for more
pudding, and as he ate, he threw the bones under the table.

Little Marleen went upstairs and took her best silk handkerchief out of
her bottom drawer, and in it she wrapped all the bones from under the
table and carried them outside, and all the time she did nothing but
weep. Then she laid them in the green grass under the juniper-tree, and
she had no sooner done so, then all her sadness seemed to leave her,
and she wept no more. And now the juniper-tree began to move, and the
branches waved backwards and forwards, first away from one another, and
then together again, as it might be someone clapping their hands for
joy. After this a mist came round the tree, and in the midst of it there
was a burning as of fire, and out of the fire there flew a beautiful
bird, that rose high into the air, singing magnificently, and when it
could no more be seen, the juniper-tree stood there as before, and the
silk handkerchief and the bones were gone.

Little Marleen now felt as lighthearted and happy as if her brother were
still alive, and she went back to the house and sat down cheerfully to
the table and ate.

The bird flew away and alighted on the house of a goldsmith and began to
sing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The goldsmith was in his workshop making a gold chain, when he heard the
song of the bird on his roof. He thought it so beautiful that he got
up and ran out, and as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his
slippers. But he ran on into the middle of the street, with a slipper on
one foot and a sock on the other; he still had on his apron, and still
held the gold chain and the pincers in his hands, and so he stood gazing
up at the bird, while the sun came shining brightly down on the street.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing! Sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ said the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing. Give that gold
chain, and I will sing it you again.’

‘Here is the chain, take it,’ said the goldsmith. ‘Only sing me that
again.’

The bird flew down and took the gold chain in his right claw, and then
he alighted again in front of the goldsmith and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

Then he flew away, and settled on the roof of a shoemaker’s house and
sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The shoemaker heard him, and he jumped up and ran out in his
shirt-sleeves, and stood looking up at the bird on the roof with his
hand over his eyes to keep himself from being blinded by the sun.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing!’ Then he called through the
door to his wife: ‘Wife, come out; here is a bird, come and look at it
and hear how beautifully it sings.’ Then he called his daughter and the
children, then the apprentices, girls and boys, and they all ran up the
street to look at the bird, and saw how splendid it was with its red
and green feathers, and its neck like burnished gold, and eyes like two
bright stars in its head.

‘Bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; you must
give me something.’

‘Wife,’ said the man, ‘go into the garret; on the upper shelf you will
see a pair of red shoes; bring them to me.’ The wife went in and fetched
the shoes.

‘There, bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘now sing me that song again.’

The bird flew down and took the red shoes in his left claw, and then he
went back to the roof and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

When he had finished, he flew away. He had the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left, and he flew right away to a mill, and the
mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click clack.’ Inside the mill were
twenty of the miller’s men hewing a stone, and as they went ‘Hick hack,
hick hack, hick hack,’ the mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click
clack.’

The bird settled on a lime-tree in front of the mill and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

then one of the men left off,

  My father grieved when I was gone;

two more men left off and listened,

  My sister loved me best of all;

then four more left off,

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

now there were only eight at work,

  Underneath

And now only five,

  the juniper-tree.

And now only one,

  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

then he looked up and the last one had left off work.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘what a beautiful song that is you sing! Let me hear it
too; sing it again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; give me that
millstone, and I will sing it again.’

‘If it belonged to me alone,’ said the man, ‘you should have it.’

‘Yes, yes,’ said the others: ‘if he will sing again, he can have it.’

The bird came down, and all the twenty millers set to and lifted up the
stone with a beam; then the bird put his head through the hole and took
the stone round his neck like a collar, and flew back with it to the
tree and sang--

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And when he had finished his song, he spread his wings, and with the
chain in his right claw, the shoes in his left, and the millstone round
his neck, he flew right away to his father’s house.

The father, the mother, and little Marleen were having their dinner.

‘How lighthearted I feel,’ said the father, ‘so pleased and cheerful.’

‘And I,’ said the mother, ‘I feel so uneasy, as if a heavy thunderstorm
were coming.’

But little Marleen sat and wept and wept.

Then the bird came flying towards the house and settled on the roof.

‘I do feel so happy,’ said the father, ‘and how beautifully the sun
shines; I feel just as if I were going to see an old friend again.’

‘Ah!’ said the wife, ‘and I am so full of distress and uneasiness that
my teeth chatter, and I feel as if there were a fire in my veins,’ and
she tore open her dress; and all the while little Marleen sat in the
corner and wept, and the plate on her knees was wet with her tears.

The bird now flew to the juniper-tree and began singing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

the mother shut her eyes and her ears, that she might see and hear
nothing, but there was a roaring sound in her ears like that of a
violent storm, and in her eyes a burning and flashing like lightning:

  My father grieved when I was gone;

‘Look, mother,’ said the man, ‘at the beautiful bird that is singing so
magnificently; and how warm and bright the sun is, and what a delicious
scent of spice in the air!’

  My sister loved me best of all;

then little Marleen laid her head down on her knees and sobbed.

‘I must go outside and see the bird nearer,’ said the man.

‘Ah, do not go!’ cried the wife. ‘I feel as if the whole house were in
flames!’

But the man went out and looked at the bird.

 She laid her kerchief over me,
 And took my bones that they might lie
 Underneath the juniper-tree
 Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

With that the bird let fall the gold chain, and it fell just round the
man’s neck, so that it fitted him exactly.

He went inside, and said, ‘See, what a splendid bird that is; he has
given me this beautiful gold chain, and looks so beautiful himself.’

But the wife was in such fear and trouble, that she fell on the floor,
and her cap fell from her head.

Then the bird began again:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

‘Ah me!’ cried the wife, ‘if I were but a thousand feet beneath the
earth, that I might not hear that song.’

  My father grieved when I was gone;

then the woman fell down again as if dead.

  My sister loved me best of all;

‘Well,’ said little Marleen, ‘I will go out too and see if the bird will
give me anything.’

So she went out.

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

and he threw down the shoes to her,

  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And she now felt quite happy and lighthearted; she put on the shoes and
danced and jumped about in them. ‘I was so miserable,’ she said, ‘when I
came out, but that has all passed away; that is indeed a splendid bird,
and he has given me a pair of red shoes.’

The wife sprang up, with her hair standing out from her head like flames
of fire. ‘Then I will go out too,’ she said, ‘and see if it will lighten
my misery, for I feel as if the world were coming to an end.’

But as she crossed the threshold, crash! the bird threw the millstone
down on her head, and she was crushed to death.

The father and little Marleen heard the sound and ran out, but they only
saw mist and flame and fire rising from the spot, and when these had
passed, there stood the little brother, and he took the father and
little Marleen by the hand; then they all three rejoiced, and went
inside together and sat down to their dinners and ate.




THE TURNIP

There were two brothers who were both soldiers; the one was rich and
the other poor. The poor man thought he would try to better himself; so,
pulling off his red coat, he became a gardener, and dug his ground well,
and sowed turnips.

When the seed came up, there was one plant bigger than all the rest; and
it kept getting larger and larger, and seemed as if it would never cease
growing; so that it might have been called the prince of turnips for
there never was such a one seen before, and never will again. At last it
was so big that it filled a cart, and two oxen could hardly draw it; and
the gardener knew not what in the world to do with it, nor whether it
would be a blessing or a curse to him. One day he said to himself, ‘What
shall I do with it? if I sell it, it will bring no more than another;
and for eating, the little turnips are better than this; the best thing
perhaps is to carry it and give it to the king as a mark of respect.’

Then he yoked his oxen, and drew the turnip to the court, and gave it
to the king. ‘What a wonderful thing!’ said the king; ‘I have seen many
strange things, but such a monster as this I never saw. Where did you
get the seed? or is it only your good luck? If so, you are a true child
of fortune.’ ‘Ah, no!’ answered the gardener, ‘I am no child of fortune;
I am a poor soldier, who never could get enough to live upon; so I
laid aside my red coat, and set to work, tilling the ground. I have a
brother, who is rich, and your majesty knows him well, and all the world
knows him; but because I am poor, everybody forgets me.’

The king then took pity on him, and said, ‘You shall be poor no
longer. I will give you so much that you shall be even richer than your
brother.’ Then he gave him gold and lands and flocks, and made him so
rich that his brother’s fortune could not at all be compared with his.

When the brother heard of all this, and how a turnip had made the
gardener so rich, he envied him sorely, and bethought himself how he
could contrive to get the same good fortune for himself. However, he
determined to manage more cleverly than his brother, and got together a
rich present of gold and fine horses for the king; and thought he must
have a much larger gift in return; for if his brother had received so
much for only a turnip, what must his present be worth?

The king took the gift very graciously, and said he knew not what to
give in return more valuable and wonderful than the great turnip; so
the soldier was forced to put it into a cart, and drag it home with him.
When he reached home, he knew not upon whom to vent his rage and spite;
and at length wicked thoughts came into his head, and he resolved to
kill his brother.

So he hired some villains to murder him; and having shown them where to
lie in ambush, he went to his brother, and said, ‘Dear brother, I have
found a hidden treasure; let us go and dig it up, and share it between
us.’ The other had no suspicions of his roguery: so they went out
together, and as they were travelling along, the murderers rushed out
upon him, bound him, and were going to hang him on a tree.

But whilst they were getting all ready, they heard the trampling of a
horse at a distance, which so frightened them that they pushed their
prisoner neck and shoulders together into a sack, and swung him up by a
cord to the tree, where they left him dangling, and ran away. Meantime
he worked and worked away, till he made a hole large enough to put out
his head.

When the horseman came up, he proved to be a student, a merry fellow,
who was journeying along on his nag, and singing as he went. As soon as
the man in the sack saw him passing under the tree, he cried out, ‘Good
morning! good morning to thee, my friend!’ The student looked about
everywhere; and seeing no one, and not knowing where the voice came
from, cried out, ‘Who calls me?’

Then the man in the tree answered, ‘Lift up thine eyes, for behold here
I sit in the sack of wisdom; here have I, in a short time, learned great
and wondrous things. Compared to this seat, all the learning of the
schools is as empty air. A little longer, and I shall know all that man
can know, and shall come forth wiser than the wisest of mankind. Here
I discern the signs and motions of the heavens and the stars; the laws
that control the winds; the number of the sands on the seashore; the
healing of the sick; the virtues of all simples, of birds, and of
precious stones. Wert thou but once here, my friend, though wouldst feel
and own the power of knowledge.

The student listened to all this and wondered much; at last he said,
‘Blessed be the day and hour when I found you; cannot you contrive to
let me into the sack for a little while?’ Then the other answered, as if
very unwillingly, ‘A little space I may allow thee to sit here, if thou
wilt reward me well and entreat me kindly; but thou must tarry yet an
hour below, till I have learnt some little matters that are yet unknown
to me.’

So the student sat himself down and waited a while; but the time hung
heavy upon him, and he begged earnestly that he might ascend forthwith,
for his thirst for knowledge was great. Then the other pretended to give
way, and said, ‘Thou must let the sack of wisdom descend, by untying
yonder cord, and then thou shalt enter.’ So the student let him down,
opened the sack, and set him free. ‘Now then,’ cried he, ‘let me ascend
quickly.’ As he began to put himself into the sack heels first, ‘Wait a
while,’ said the gardener, ‘that is not the way.’ Then he pushed him
in head first, tied up the sack, and soon swung up the searcher after
wisdom dangling in the air. ‘How is it with thee, friend?’ said he,
‘dost thou not feel that wisdom comes unto thee? Rest there in peace,
till thou art a wiser man than thou wert.’

So saying, he trotted off on the student’s nag, and left the poor fellow
to gather wisdom till somebody should come and let him down.




CLEVER HANS

The mother of Hans said: ‘Whither away, Hans?’ Hans answered: ‘To
Gretel.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh, I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’
‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day,
Hans. What do you bring that is good?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want to have
something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a needle, Hans says:
‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the cart
home. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’
‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing; had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a needle.’ ‘Where is the
needle, Hans?’ ‘Stuck in the hay-cart.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans. You
should have stuck the needle in your sleeve.’ ‘Never mind, I’ll do
better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is
good?’ ‘I bring nothing. I want to have something given to me.’ Gretel
presents Hans with a knife. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans
takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home. ‘Good evening,
mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ What
did you take her?’ ‘Took her nothing, she gave me something.’ ‘What did
Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a knife.’ ‘Where is the knife, Hans?’ ‘Stuck
in my sleeve.’ ‘That’s ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in
your pocket.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a young goat. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans takes
the goat, ties its legs, and puts it in his pocket. When he gets home it
is suffocated. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have
you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing, she
gave me something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me a goat.’
‘Where is the goat, Hans?’ ‘Put it in my pocket.’ ‘That was ill done,
Hans, you should have put a rope round the goat’s neck.’ ‘Never mind,
will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a piece of bacon. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it away behind him.
The dogs come and devour the bacon. When he gets home, he has the rope
in his hand, and there is no longer anything hanging on to it. ‘Good
evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took her nothing, she gave me
something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a bit of bacon.’ ‘Where
is the bacon, Hans?’ ‘I tied it to a rope, brought it home, dogs took
it.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans, you should have carried the bacon on your
head.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel.
‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans, What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I
bring nothing, but would have something given.’ Gretel presents Hans
with a calf. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks his face.
‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took nothing, but had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘A calf.’ ‘Where have you the
calf, Hans?’ ‘I set it on my head and it kicked my face.’ ‘That was
ill done, Hans, you should have led the calf, and put it in the stall.’
‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good
thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, but would have something given.’
Gretel says to Hans: ‘I will go with you.’

Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack, and binds
her fast. Then Hans goes to his mother. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good
evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take
her?’ ‘I took her nothing.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me
nothing, she came with me.’ ‘Where have you left Gretel?’ ‘I led her by
the rope, tied her to the rack, and scattered some grass for her.’ ‘That
was ill done, Hans, you should have cast friendly eyes on her.’ ‘Never
mind, will do better.’

Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves’ and sheep’s eyes,
and threw them in Gretel’s face. Then Gretel became angry, tore herself
loose and ran away, and was no longer the bride of Hans.




THE THREE LANGUAGES

An aged count once lived in Switzerland, who had an only son, but he
was stupid, and could learn nothing. Then said the father: ‘Hark you,
my son, try as I will I can get nothing into your head. You must go from
hence, I will give you into the care of a celebrated master, who shall
see what he can do with you.’ The youth was sent into a strange town,
and remained a whole year with the master. At the end of this time,
he came home again, and his father asked: ‘Now, my son, what have you
learnt?’ ‘Father, I have learnt what the dogs say when they bark.’ ‘Lord
have mercy on us!’ cried the father; ‘is that all you have learnt? I
will send you into another town, to another master.’ The youth was taken
thither, and stayed a year with this master likewise. When he came back
the father again asked: ‘My son, what have you learnt?’ He answered:
‘Father, I have learnt what the birds say.’ Then the father fell into a
rage and said: ‘Oh, you lost man, you have spent the precious time and
learnt nothing; are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes? I will
send you to a third master, but if you learn nothing this time also, I
will no longer be your father.’ The youth remained a whole year with the
third master also, and when he came home again, and his father inquired:
‘My son, what have you learnt?’ he answered: ‘Dear father, I have this
year learnt what the frogs croak.’ Then the father fell into the most
furious anger, sprang up, called his people thither, and said: ‘This man
is no longer my son, I drive him forth, and command you to take him
out into the forest, and kill him.’ They took him forth, but when they
should have killed him, they could not do it for pity, and let him go,
and they cut the eyes and tongue out of a deer that they might carry
them to the old man as a token.

The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress where he
begged for a night’s lodging. ‘Yes,’ said the lord of the castle, ‘if
you will pass the night down there in the old tower, go thither; but I
warn you, it is at the peril of your life, for it is full of wild dogs,
which bark and howl without stopping, and at certain hours a man has to
be given to them, whom they at once devour.’ The whole district was in
sorrow and dismay because of them, and yet no one could do anything to
stop this. The youth, however, was without fear, and said: ‘Just let me
go down to the barking dogs, and give me something that I can throw to
them; they will do nothing to harm me.’ As he himself would have it so,
they gave him some food for the wild animals, and led him down to the
tower. When he went inside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged
their tails quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and
did not hurt one hair of his head. Next morning, to the astonishment of
everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and said to the lord of
the castle: ‘The dogs have revealed to me, in their own language, why
they dwell there, and bring evil on the land. They are bewitched, and
are obliged to watch over a great treasure which is below in the tower,
and they can have no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise
learnt, from their discourse, how that is to be done.’ Then all who
heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him
as a son if he accomplished it successfully. He went down again, and
as he knew what he had to do, he did it thoroughly, and brought a chest
full of gold out with him. The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth
heard no more; they had disappeared, and the country was freed from the
trouble.

After some time he took it in his head that he would travel to Rome. On
the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number of frogs were sitting
croaking. He listened to them, and when he became aware of what they
were saying, he grew very thoughtful and sad. At last he arrived in
Rome, where the Pope had just died, and there was great doubt among
the cardinals as to whom they should appoint as his successor. They at
length agreed that the person should be chosen as pope who should be
distinguished by some divine and miraculous token. And just as that was
decided on, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two
snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there. The
ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above, and asked him on
the spot if he would be pope. He was undecided, and knew not if he were
worthy of this, but the doves counselled him to do it, and at length he
said yes. Then was he anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled
what he had heard from the frogs on his way, which had so affected him,
that he was to be his Holiness the Pope. Then he had to sing a mass, and
did not know one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on his
shoulders, and said it all in his ear.




THE FOX AND THE CAT

It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought to
herself: ‘He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed in the
world,’ she spoke to him in a friendly way. ‘Good day, dear Mr Fox,
how are you? How is all with you? How are you getting on in these hard
times?’ The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from
head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would give
any answer or not. At last he said: ‘Oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you
piebald fool, you hungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of? Have
you the cheek to ask how I am getting on? What have you learnt? How
many arts do you understand?’ ‘I understand but one,’ replied the
cat, modestly. ‘What art is that?’ asked the fox. ‘When the hounds are
following me, I can spring into a tree and save myself.’ ‘Is that all?’
said the fox. ‘I am master of a hundred arts, and have into the bargain
a sackful of cunning. You make me sorry for you; come with me, I will
teach you how people get away from the hounds.’ Just then came a hunter
with four dogs. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down at the top
of it, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her. ‘Open your
sack, Mr Fox, open your sack,’ cried the cat to him, but the dogs had
already seized him, and were holding him fast. ‘Ah, Mr Fox,’ cried the
cat. ‘You with your hundred arts are left in the lurch! Had you been
able to climb like me, you would not have lost your life.’




THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS

‘Dear children,’ said a poor man to his four sons, ‘I have nothing to
give you; you must go out into the wide world and try your luck. Begin
by learning some craft or another, and see how you can get on.’ So the
four brothers took their walking-sticks in their hands, and their little
bundles on their shoulders, and after bidding their father goodbye, went
all out at the gate together. When they had got on some way they came
to four crossways, each leading to a different country. Then the eldest
said, ‘Here we must part; but this day four years we will come back
to this spot, and in the meantime each must try what he can do for
himself.’

So each brother went his way; and as the eldest was hastening on a man
met him, and asked him where he was going, and what he wanted. ‘I am
going to try my luck in the world, and should like to begin by learning
some art or trade,’ answered he. ‘Then,’ said the man, ‘go with me, and
I will teach you to become the cunningest thief that ever was.’ ‘No,’
said the other, ‘that is not an honest calling, and what can one look
to earn by it in the end but the gallows?’ ‘Oh!’ said the man, ‘you need
not fear the gallows; for I will only teach you to steal what will be
fair game: I meddle with nothing but what no one else can get or care
anything about, and where no one can find you out.’ So the young man
agreed to follow his trade, and he soon showed himself so clever, that
nothing could escape him that he had once set his mind upon.

The second brother also met a man, who, when he found out what he was
setting out upon, asked him what craft he meant to follow. ‘I do not
know yet,’ said he. ‘Then come with me, and be a star-gazer. It is a
noble art, for nothing can be hidden from you, when once you understand
the stars.’ The plan pleased him much, and he soon became such a skilful
star-gazer, that when he had served out his time, and wanted to leave
his master, he gave him a glass, and said, ‘With this you can see all
that is passing in the sky and on earth, and nothing can be hidden from
you.’

The third brother met a huntsman, who took him with him, and taught him
so well all that belonged to hunting, that he became very clever in the
craft of the woods; and when he left his master he gave him a bow, and
said, ‘Whatever you shoot at with this bow you will be sure to hit.’

The youngest brother likewise met a man who asked him what he wished to
do. ‘Would not you like,’ said he, ‘to be a tailor?’ ‘Oh, no!’ said
the young man; ‘sitting cross-legged from morning to night, working
backwards and forwards with a needle and goose, will never suit me.’
‘Oh!’ answered the man, ‘that is not my sort of tailoring; come with me,
and you will learn quite another kind of craft from that.’ Not knowing
what better to do, he came into the plan, and learnt tailoring from the
beginning; and when he left his master, he gave him a needle, and said,
‘You can sew anything with this, be it as soft as an egg or as hard as
steel; and the joint will be so fine that no seam will be seen.’

After the space of four years, at the time agreed upon, the four
brothers met at the four cross-roads; and having welcomed each other,
set off towards their father’s home, where they told him all that had
happened to them, and how each had learned some craft.

Then, one day, as they were sitting before the house under a very high
tree, the father said, ‘I should like to try what each of you can do in
this way.’ So he looked up, and said to the second son, ‘At the top of
this tree there is a chaffinch’s nest; tell me how many eggs there are
in it.’ The star-gazer took his glass, looked up, and said, ‘Five.’
‘Now,’ said the father to the eldest son, ‘take away the eggs without
letting the bird that is sitting upon them and hatching them know
anything of what you are doing.’ So the cunning thief climbed up the
tree, and brought away to his father the five eggs from under the bird;
and it never saw or felt what he was doing, but kept sitting on at its
ease. Then the father took the eggs, and put one on each corner of the
table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, ‘Cut all
the eggs in two pieces at one shot.’ The huntsman took up his bow, and
at one shot struck all the five eggs as his father wished.

‘Now comes your turn,’ said he to the young tailor; ‘sew the eggs and
the young birds in them together again, so neatly that the shot shall
have done them no harm.’ Then the tailor took his needle, and sewed the
eggs as he was told; and when he had done, the thief was sent to take
them back to the nest, and put them under the bird without its knowing
it. Then she went on sitting, and hatched them: and in a few days they
crawled out, and had only a little red streak across their necks, where
the tailor had sewn them together.

‘Well done, sons!’ said the old man; ‘you have made good use of your
time, and learnt something worth the knowing; but I am sure I do not
know which ought to have the prize. Oh, that a time might soon come for
you to turn your skill to some account!’

Not long after this there was a great bustle in the country; for the
king’s daughter had been carried off by a mighty dragon, and the king
mourned over his loss day and night, and made it known that whoever
brought her back to him should have her for a wife. Then the four
brothers said to each other, ‘Here is a chance for us; let us try
what we can do.’ And they agreed to see whether they could not set the
princess free. ‘I will soon find out where she is, however,’ said the
star-gazer, as he looked through his glass; and he soon cried out, ‘I
see her afar off, sitting upon a rock in the sea, and I can spy the
dragon close by, guarding her.’ Then he went to the king, and asked for
a ship for himself and his brothers; and they sailed together over the
sea, till they came to the right place. There they found the princess
sitting, as the star-gazer had said, on the rock; and the dragon was
lying asleep, with his head upon her lap. ‘I dare not shoot at him,’
said the huntsman, ‘for I should kill the beautiful young lady also.’
‘Then I will try my skill,’ said the thief, and went and stole her away
from under the dragon, so quietly and gently that the beast did not know
it, but went on snoring.

Then away they hastened with her full of joy in their boat towards the
ship; but soon came the dragon roaring behind them through the air; for
he awoke and missed the princess. But when he got over the boat, and
wanted to pounce upon them and carry off the princess, the huntsman took
up his bow and shot him straight through the heart so that he fell down
dead. They were still not safe; for he was such a great beast that in
his fall he overset the boat, and they had to swim in the open sea
upon a few planks. So the tailor took his needle, and with a few large
stitches put some of the planks together; and he sat down upon these,
and sailed about and gathered up all pieces of the boat; and then tacked
them together so quickly that the boat was soon ready, and they then
reached the ship and got home safe.

When they had brought home the princess to her father, there was great
rejoicing; and he said to the four brothers, ‘One of you shall marry
her, but you must settle amongst yourselves which it is to be.’ Then
there arose a quarrel between them; and the star-gazer said, ‘If I had
not found the princess out, all your skill would have been of no use;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘Your seeing her would have been of
no use,’ said the thief, ‘if I had not taken her away from the dragon;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘No, she is mine,’ said the huntsman;
‘for if I had not killed the dragon, he would, after all, have torn you
and the princess into pieces.’ ‘And if I had not sewn the boat together
again,’ said the tailor, ‘you would all have been drowned, therefore she
is mine.’ Then the king put in a word, and said, ‘Each of you is right;
and as all cannot have the young lady, the best way is for neither of
you to have her: for the truth is, there is somebody she likes a great
deal better. But to make up for your loss, I will give each of you, as a
reward for his skill, half a kingdom.’ So the brothers agreed that this
plan would be much better than either quarrelling or marrying a lady who
had no mind to have them. And the king then gave to each half a kingdom,
as he had said; and they lived very happily the rest of their days, and
took good care of their father; and somebody took better care of the
young lady, than to let either the dragon or one of the craftsmen have
her again.




LILY AND THE LION

A merchant, who had three daughters, was once setting out upon a
journey; but before he went he asked each daughter what gift he should
bring back for her. The eldest wished for pearls; the second for jewels;
but the third, who was called Lily, said, ‘Dear father, bring me a
rose.’ Now it was no easy task to find a rose, for it was the middle
of winter; yet as she was his prettiest daughter, and was very fond of
flowers, her father said he would try what he could do. So he kissed all
three, and bid them goodbye.

And when the time came for him to go home, he had bought pearls and
jewels for the two eldest, but he had sought everywhere in vain for the
rose; and when he went into any garden and asked for such a thing, the
people laughed at him, and asked him whether he thought roses grew in
snow. This grieved him very much, for Lily was his dearest child; and as
he was journeying home, thinking what he should bring her, he came to a
fine castle; and around the castle was a garden, in one half of which it
seemed to be summer-time and in the other half winter. On one side the
finest flowers were in full bloom, and on the other everything looked
dreary and buried in the snow. ‘A lucky hit!’ said he, as he called to
his servant, and told him to go to a beautiful bed of roses that was
there, and bring him away one of the finest flowers.

This done, they were riding away well pleased, when up sprang a fierce
lion, and roared out, ‘Whoever has stolen my roses shall be eaten up
alive!’ Then the man said, ‘I knew not that the garden belonged to you;
can nothing save my life?’ ‘No!’ said the lion, ‘nothing, unless you
undertake to give me whatever meets you on your return home; if you
agree to this, I will give you your life, and the rose too for your
daughter.’ But the man was unwilling to do so and said, ‘It may be my
youngest daughter, who loves me most, and always runs to meet me when
I go home.’ Then the servant was greatly frightened, and said, ‘It may
perhaps be only a cat or a dog.’ And at last the man yielded with a
heavy heart, and took the rose; and said he would give the lion whatever
should meet him first on his return.

And as he came near home, it was Lily, his youngest and dearest
daughter, that met him; she came running, and kissed him, and welcomed
him home; and when she saw that he had brought her the rose, she was
still more glad. But her father began to be very sorrowful, and to weep,
saying, ‘Alas, my dearest child! I have bought this flower at a high
price, for I have said I would give you to a wild lion; and when he has
you, he will tear you in pieces, and eat you.’ Then he told her all that
had happened, and said she should not go, let what would happen.

But she comforted him, and said, ‘Dear father, the word you have given
must be kept; I will go to the lion, and soothe him: perhaps he will let
me come safe home again.’

The next morning she asked the way she was to go, and took leave of her
father, and went forth with a bold heart into the wood. But the lion was
an enchanted prince. By day he and all his court were lions, but in the
evening they took their right forms again. And when Lily came to the
castle, he welcomed her so courteously that she agreed to marry him. The
wedding-feast was held, and they lived happily together a long time. The
prince was only to be seen as soon as evening came, and then he held his
court; but every morning he left his bride, and went away by himself,
she knew not whither, till the night came again.

After some time he said to her, ‘Tomorrow there will be a great feast in
your father’s house, for your eldest sister is to be married; and if
you wish to go and visit her my lions shall lead you thither.’ Then she
rejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing her father once more, and set
out with the lions; and everyone was overjoyed to see her, for they had
thought her dead long since. But she told them how happy she was, and
stayed till the feast was over, and then went back to the wood.

Her second sister was soon after married, and when Lily was asked to
go to the wedding, she said to the prince, ‘I will not go alone this
time--you must go with me.’ But he would not, and said that it would be
a very hazardous thing; for if the least ray of the torch-light should
fall upon him his enchantment would become still worse, for he should be
changed into a dove, and be forced to wander about the world for seven
long years. However, she gave him no rest, and said she would take care
no light should fall upon him. So at last they set out together, and
took with them their little child; and she chose a large hall with thick
walls for him to sit in while the wedding-torches were lighted; but,
unluckily, no one saw that there was a crack in the door. Then the
wedding was held with great pomp, but as the train came from the church,
and passed with the torches before the hall, a very small ray of light
fell upon the prince. In a moment he disappeared, and when his wife came
in and looked for him, she found only a white dove; and it said to her,
‘Seven years must I fly up and down over the face of the earth, but
every now and then I will let fall a white feather, that will show you
the way I am going; follow it, and at last you may overtake and set me
free.’

This said, he flew out at the door, and poor Lily followed; and every
now and then a white feather fell, and showed her the way she was to
journey. Thus she went roving on through the wide world, and looked
neither to the right hand nor to the left, nor took any rest, for seven
years. Then she began to be glad, and thought to herself that the time
was fast coming when all her troubles should end; yet repose was still
far off, for one day as she was travelling on she missed the white
feather, and when she lifted up her eyes she could nowhere see the dove.
‘Now,’ thought she to herself, ‘no aid of man can be of use to me.’ So
she went to the sun and said, ‘Thou shinest everywhere, on the hill’s
top and the valley’s depth--hast thou anywhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the sun, ‘I have not seen it; but I will give thee a
casket--open it when thy hour of need comes.’

So she thanked the sun, and went on her way till eventide; and when
the moon arose, she cried unto it, and said, ‘Thou shinest through the
night, over field and grove--hast thou nowhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the moon, ‘I cannot help thee but I will give thee an
egg--break it when need comes.’

Then she thanked the moon, and went on till the night-wind blew; and she
raised up her voice to it, and said, ‘Thou blowest through every tree
and under every leaf--hast thou not seen my white dove?’ ‘No,’ said the
night-wind, ‘but I will ask three other winds; perhaps they have seen
it.’ Then the east wind and the west wind came, and said they too had
not seen it, but the south wind said, ‘I have seen the white dove--he
has fled to the Red Sea, and is changed once more into a lion, for the
seven years are passed away, and there he is fighting with a dragon;
and the dragon is an enchanted princess, who seeks to separate him from
you.’ Then the night-wind said, ‘I will give thee counsel. Go to the
Red Sea; on the right shore stand many rods--count them, and when thou
comest to the eleventh, break it off, and smite the dragon with it; and
so the lion will have the victory, and both of them will appear to you
in their own forms. Then look round and thou wilt see a griffin, winged
like bird, sitting by the Red Sea; jump on to his back with thy beloved
one as quickly as possible, and he will carry you over the waters to
your home. I will also give thee this nut,’ continued the night-wind.
‘When you are half-way over, throw it down, and out of the waters will
immediately spring up a high nut-tree on which the griffin will be able
to rest, otherwise he would not have the strength to bear you the whole
way; if, therefore, thou dost forget to throw down the nut, he will let
you both fall into the sea.’

So our poor wanderer went forth, and found all as the night-wind had
said; and she plucked the eleventh rod, and smote the dragon, and the
lion forthwith became a prince, and the dragon a princess again. But
no sooner was the princess released from the spell, than she seized
the prince by the arm and sprang on to the griffin’s back, and went off
carrying the prince away with her.

Thus the unhappy traveller was again forsaken and forlorn; but she
took heart and said, ‘As far as the wind blows, and so long as the cock
crows, I will journey on, till I find him once again.’ She went on for
a long, long way, till at length she came to the castle whither the
princess had carried the prince; and there was a feast got ready, and
she heard that the wedding was about to be held. ‘Heaven aid me now!’
said she; and she took the casket that the sun had given her, and found
that within it lay a dress as dazzling as the sun itself. So she put it
on, and went into the palace, and all the people gazed upon her; and
the dress pleased the bride so much that she asked whether it was to be
sold. ‘Not for gold and silver.’ said she, ‘but for flesh and blood.’
The princess asked what she meant, and she said, ‘Let me speak with the
bridegroom this night in his chamber, and I will give thee the dress.’
At last the princess agreed, but she told her chamberlain to give the
prince a sleeping draught, that he might not hear or see her. When
evening came, and the prince had fallen asleep, she was led into
his chamber, and she sat herself down at his feet, and said: ‘I have
followed thee seven years. I have been to the sun, the moon, and the
night-wind, to seek thee, and at last I have helped thee to overcome
the dragon. Wilt thou then forget me quite?’ But the prince all the time
slept so soundly, that her voice only passed over him, and seemed like
the whistling of the wind among the fir-trees.

Then poor Lily was led away, and forced to give up the golden dress; and
when she saw that there was no help for her, she went out into a meadow,
and sat herself down and wept. But as she sat she bethought herself of
the egg that the moon had given her; and when she broke it, there ran
out a hen and twelve chickens of pure gold, that played about, and then
nestled under the old one’s wings, so as to form the most beautiful
sight in the world. And she rose up and drove them before her, till the
bride saw them from her window, and was so pleased that she came forth
and asked her if she would sell the brood. ‘Not for gold or silver, but
for flesh and blood: let me again this evening speak with the bridegroom
in his chamber, and I will give thee the whole brood.’

Then the princess thought to betray her as before, and agreed to
what she asked: but when the prince went to his chamber he asked
the chamberlain why the wind had whistled so in the night. And the
chamberlain told him all--how he had given him a sleeping draught, and
how a poor maiden had come and spoken to him in his chamber, and was
to come again that night. Then the prince took care to throw away the
sleeping draught; and when Lily came and began again to tell him what
woes had befallen her, and how faithful and true to him she had been,
he knew his beloved wife’s voice, and sprang up, and said, ‘You have
awakened me as from a dream, for the strange princess had thrown a spell
around me, so that I had altogether forgotten you; but Heaven hath sent
you to me in a lucky hour.’

And they stole away out of the palace by night unawares, and seated
themselves on the griffin, who flew back with them over the Red Sea.
When they were half-way across Lily let the nut fall into the water,
and immediately a large nut-tree arose from the sea, whereon the griffin
rested for a while, and then carried them safely home. There they found
their child, now grown up to be comely and fair; and after all their
troubles they lived happily together to the end of their days.




THE FOX AND THE HORSE

A farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to
him: but he was now grown too old to work; so the farmer would give him
nothing more to eat, and said, ‘I want you no longer, so take yourself
off out of my stable; I shall not take you back again until you are
stronger than a lion.’ Then he opened the door and turned him adrift.

The poor horse was very melancholy, and wandered up and down in the
wood, seeking some little shelter from the cold wind and rain. Presently
a fox met him: ‘What’s the matter, my friend?’ said he, ‘why do you hang
down your head and look so lonely and woe-begone?’ ‘Ah!’ replied the
horse, ‘justice and avarice never dwell in one house; my master has
forgotten all that I have done for him so many years, and because I
can no longer work he has turned me adrift, and says unless I become
stronger than a lion he will not take me back again; what chance can I
have of that? he knows I have none, or he would not talk so.’

However, the fox bid him be of good cheer, and said, ‘I will help you;
lie down there, stretch yourself out quite stiff, and pretend to be
dead.’ The horse did as he was told, and the fox went straight to the
lion who lived in a cave close by, and said to him, ‘A little way off
lies a dead horse; come with me and you may make an excellent meal of
his carcase.’ The lion was greatly pleased, and set off immediately; and
when they came to the horse, the fox said, ‘You will not be able to eat
him comfortably here; I’ll tell you what--I will tie you fast to
his tail, and then you can draw him to your den, and eat him at your
leisure.’

This advice pleased the lion, so he laid himself down quietly for the
fox to make him fast to the horse. But the fox managed to tie his legs
together and bound all so hard and fast that with all his strength he
could not set himself free. When the work was done, the fox clapped the
horse on the shoulder, and said, ‘Jip! Dobbin! Jip!’ Then up he sprang,
and moved off, dragging the lion behind him. The beast began to roar
and bellow, till all the birds of the wood flew away for fright; but the
horse let him sing on, and made his way quietly over the fields to his
master’s house.

‘Here he is, master,’ said he, ‘I have got the better of him’: and when
the farmer saw his old servant, his heart relented, and he said. ‘Thou
shalt stay in thy stable and be well taken care of.’ And so the poor old
horse had plenty to eat, and lived--till he died.




THE BLUE LIGHT

There was once upon a time a soldier who for many years had served the
king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no longer
because of the many wounds which he had received. The king said to him:
‘You may return to your home, I need you no longer, and you will not
receive any more money, for he only receives wages who renders me
service for them.’ Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living,
went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the
evening he entered a forest. When darkness came on, he saw a light,
which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a witch. ‘Do give
me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,’ said he to
her, ‘or I shall starve.’ ‘Oho!’ she answered, ‘who gives anything to a
run-away soldier? Yet will I be compassionate, and take you in, if you
will do what I wish.’ ‘What do you wish?’ said the soldier. ‘That you
should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow.’ The soldier consented,
and next day laboured with all his strength, but could not finish it by
the evening. ‘I see well enough,’ said the witch, ‘that you can do no
more today, but I will keep you yet another night, in payment for
which you must tomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small.’ The
soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch
proposed that he should stay one night more. ‘Tomorrow, you shall only
do me a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house, there is an old
dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, and never goes
out, and you shall bring it up again.’ Next day the old woman took him
to the well, and let him down in a basket. He found the blue light, and
made her a signal to draw him up again. She did draw him up, but when he
came near the edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the
blue light away from him. ‘No,’ said he, perceiving her evil intention,
‘I will not give you the light until I am standing with both feet upon
the ground.’ The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the
well, and went away.

The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the blue
light went on burning, but of what use was that to him? He saw very well
that he could not escape death. He sat for a while very sorrowfully,
then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which
was still half full. ‘This shall be my last pleasure,’ thought he,
pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke. When the
smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little black dwarf stood
before him, and said: ‘Lord, what are your commands?’ ‘What my commands
are?’ replied the soldier, quite astonished. ‘I must do everything you
bid me,’ said the little man. ‘Good,’ said the soldier; ‘then in the
first place help me out of this well.’ The little man took him by the
hand, and led him through an underground passage, but he did not forget
to take the blue light with him. On the way the dwarf showed him the
treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the
soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he was above, he said
to the little man: ‘Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before
the judge.’ In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild
tom-cat and screaming frightfully. Nor was it long before the little man
reappeared. ‘It is all done,’ said he, ‘and the witch is already hanging
on the gallows. What further commands has my lord?’ inquired the dwarf.
‘At this moment, none,’ answered the soldier; ‘you can return home, only
be at hand immediately, if I summon you.’ ‘Nothing more is needed than
that you should light your pipe at the blue light, and I will appear
before you at once.’ Thereupon he vanished from his sight.

The soldier returned to the town from which he came. He went to the
best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord
furnish him a room as handsome as possible. When it was ready and the
soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black manikin
and said: ‘I have served the king faithfully, but he has dismissed me,
and left me to hunger, and now I want to take my revenge.’ ‘What am I to
do?’ asked the little man. ‘Late at night, when the king’s daughter is
in bed, bring her here in her sleep, she shall do servant’s work for
me.’ The manikin said: ‘That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very
dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.’
When twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the manikin
carried in the princess. ‘Aha! are you there?’ cried the soldier, ‘get
to your work at once! Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.’ When
she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he
stretched out his feet and said: ‘Pull off my boots,’ and then he
threw them in her face, and made her pick them up again, and clean
and brighten them. She, however, did everything he bade her, without
opposition, silently and with half-shut eyes. When the first cock
crowed, the manikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her
in her bed.

Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and told
him that she had had a very strange dream. ‘I was carried through the
streets with the rapidity of lightning,’ said she, ‘and taken into a
soldier’s room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his
room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work. It was only a
dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done everything.’
‘The dream may have been true,’ said the king. ‘I will give you a piece
of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in the
pocket, and then if you are carried away again, they will fall out and
leave a track in the streets.’ But unseen by the king, the manikin was
standing beside him when he said that, and heard all. At night when
the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets, some peas
certainly did fall out of her pocket, but they made no track, for the
crafty manikin had just before scattered peas in every street there
was. And again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until
cock-crow.

Next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but it was
all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting, picking up
peas, and saying: ‘It must have rained peas, last night.’ ‘We must think
of something else,’ said the king; ‘keep your shoes on when you go to
bed, and before you come back from the place where you are taken, hide
one of them there, I will soon contrive to find it.’ The black manikin
heard this plot, and at night when the soldier again ordered him to
bring the princess, revealed it to him, and told him that he knew of no
expedient to counteract this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found
in the soldier’s house it would go badly with him. ‘Do what I bid you,’
replied the soldier, and again this third night the princess was obliged
to work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under
the bed.

Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s
shoe. It was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at the
entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought back,
and thrown into prison. In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable
things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in
his pocket. And now loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of
his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by. The
soldier tapped at the pane of glass, and when this man came up, said to
him: ‘Be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle I have left lying in
the inn, and I will give you a ducat for doing it.’ His comrade ran
thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the soldier was alone
again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black manikin. ‘Have no
fear,’ said the latter to his master. ‘Go wheresoever they take you, and
let them do what they will, only take the blue light with you.’ Next day
the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked, the judge
condemned him to death. When he was led forth to die, he begged a last
favour of the king. ‘What is it?’ asked the king. ‘That I may smoke one
more pipe on my way.’ ‘You may smoke three,’ answered the king, ‘but do
not imagine that I will spare your life.’ Then the soldier pulled out
his pipe and lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths
of smoke had ascended, the manikin was there with a small cudgel in his
hand, and said: ‘What does my lord command?’ ‘Strike down to earth that
false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who has
treated me so ill.’ Then the manikin fell on them like lightning,
darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touched by
his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again. The king
was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier’s mercy, and merely to
be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and his
daughter to wife.




THE RAVEN

There was once a queen who had a little daughter, still too young to run
alone. One day the child was very troublesome, and the mother could not
quiet it, do what she would. She grew impatient, and seeing the ravens
flying round the castle, she opened the window, and said: ‘I wish you
were a raven and would fly away, then I should have a little peace.’
Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when the child in her arms was
turned into a raven, and flew away from her through the open window. The
bird took its flight to a dark wood and remained there for a long time,
and meanwhile the parents could hear nothing of their child.

Long after this, a man was making his way through the wood when he heard
a raven calling, and he followed the sound of the voice. As he drew
near, the raven said, ‘I am by birth a king’s daughter, but am now under
the spell of some enchantment; you can, however, set me free.’ ‘What
am I to do?’ he asked. She replied, ‘Go farther into the wood until you
come to a house, wherein lives an old woman; she will offer you food and
drink, but you must not take of either; if you do, you will fall into
a deep sleep, and will not be able to help me. In the garden behind the
house is a large tan-heap, and on that you must stand and watch for me.
I shall drive there in my carriage at two o’clock in the afternoon for
three successive days; the first day it will be drawn by four white, the
second by four chestnut, and the last by four black horses; but if you
fail to keep awake and I find you sleeping, I shall not be set free.’

The man promised to do all that she wished, but the raven said, ‘Alas! I
know even now that you will take something from the woman and be unable
to save me.’ The man assured her again that he would on no account touch
a thing to eat or drink.

When he came to the house and went inside, the old woman met him, and
said, ‘Poor man! how tired you are! Come in and rest and let me give you
something to eat and drink.’

‘No,’ answered the man, ‘I will neither eat not drink.’

But she would not leave him alone, and urged him saying, ‘If you will
not eat anything, at least you might take a draught of wine; one drink
counts for nothing,’ and at last he allowed himself to be persuaded, and
drank.

As it drew towards the appointed hour, he went outside into the garden
and mounted the tan-heap to await the raven. Suddenly a feeling of
fatigue came over him, and unable to resist it, he lay down for a little
while, fully determined, however, to keep awake; but in another minute
his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell into such a deep sleep,
that all the noises in the world would not have awakened him. At two
o’clock the raven came driving along, drawn by her four white horses;
but even before she reached the spot, she said to herself, sighing, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep.’ When she entered the garden, there she found
him as she had feared, lying on the tan-heap, fast asleep. She got out
of her carriage and went to him; she called him and shook him, but it
was all in vain, he still continued sleeping.

The next day at noon, the old woman came to him again with food and
drink which he at first refused. At last, overcome by her persistent
entreaties that he would take something, he lifted the glass and drank
again.

Towards two o’clock he went into the garden and on to the tan-heap to
watch for the raven. He had not been there long before he began to feel
so tired that his limbs seemed hardly able to support him, and he could
not stand upright any longer; so again he lay down and fell fast asleep.
As the raven drove along her four chestnut horses, she said sorrowfully
to herself, ‘I know he has fallen asleep.’ She went as before to look
for him, but he slept, and it was impossible to awaken him.

The following day the old woman said to him, ‘What is this? You are not
eating or drinking anything, do you want to kill yourself?’

He answered, ‘I may not and will not either eat or drink.’

But she put down the dish of food and the glass of wine in front of him,
and when he smelt the wine, he was unable to resist the temptation, and
took a deep draught.

When the hour came round again he went as usual on to the tan-heap in
the garden to await the king’s daughter, but he felt even more overcome
with weariness than on the two previous days, and throwing himself down,
he slept like a log. At two o’clock the raven could be seen approaching,
and this time her coachman and everything about her, as well as her
horses, were black.

She was sadder than ever as she drove along, and said mournfully, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep, and will not be able to set me free.’ She
found him sleeping heavily, and all her efforts to awaken him were of no
avail. Then she placed beside him a loaf, and some meat, and a flask
of wine, of such a kind, that however much he took of them, they would
never grow less. After that she drew a gold ring, on which her name was
engraved, off her finger, and put it upon one of his. Finally, she laid
a letter near him, in which, after giving him particulars of the food
and drink she had left for him, she finished with the following words:
‘I see that as long as you remain here you will never be able to set me
free; if, however, you still wish to do so, come to the golden castle
of Stromberg; this is well within your power to accomplish.’ She then
returned to her carriage and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg.

When the man awoke and found that he had been sleeping, he was grieved
at heart, and said, ‘She has no doubt been here and driven away again,
and it is now too late for me to save her.’ Then his eyes fell on the
things which were lying beside him; he read the letter, and knew from it
all that had happened. He rose up without delay, eager to start on his
way and to reach the castle of Stromberg, but he had no idea in which
direction he ought to go. He travelled about a long time in search of it
and came at last to a dark forest, through which he went on walking for
fourteen days and still could not find a way out. Once more the night
came on, and worn out he lay down under a bush and fell asleep. Again
the next day he pursued his way through the forest, and that evening,
thinking to rest again, he lay down as before, but he heard such a
howling and wailing that he found it impossible to sleep. He waited till
it was darker and people had begun to light up their houses, and then
seeing a little glimmer ahead of him, he went towards it.

He found that the light came from a house which looked smaller than
it really was, from the contrast of its height with that of an immense
giant who stood in front of it. He thought to himself, ‘If the giant
sees me going in, my life will not be worth much.’ However, after a
while he summoned up courage and went forward. When the giant saw him,
he called out, ‘It is lucky for that you have come, for I have not had
anything to eat for a long time. I can have you now for my supper.’ ‘I
would rather you let that alone,’ said the man, ‘for I do not willingly
give myself up to be eaten; if you are wanting food I have enough to
satisfy your hunger.’ ‘If that is so,’ replied the giant, ‘I will leave
you in peace; I only thought of eating you because I had nothing else.’

So they went indoors together and sat down, and the man brought out the
bread, meat, and wine, which although he had eaten and drunk of them,
were still unconsumed. The giant was pleased with the good cheer, and
ate and drank to his heart’s content. When he had finished his supper
the man asked him if he could direct him to the castle of Stromberg.
The giant said, ‘I will look on my map; on it are marked all the towns,
villages, and houses.’ So he fetched his map, and looked for the castle,
but could not find it. ‘Never mind,’ he said, ‘I have larger maps
upstairs in the cupboard, we will look on those,’ but they searched in
vain, for the castle was not marked even on these. The man now thought
he should like to continue his journey, but the giant begged him to
remain for a day or two longer until the return of his brother, who was
away in search of provisions. When the brother came home, they asked him
about the castle of Stromberg, and he told them he would look on his own
maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hunger. Accordingly, when
he had finished his supper, they all went up together to his room and
looked through his maps, but the castle was not to be found. Then he
fetched other older maps, and they went on looking for the castle until
at last they found it, but it was many thousand miles away. ‘How shall I
be able to get there?’ asked the man. ‘I have two hours to spare,’ said
the giant, ‘and I will carry you into the neighbourhood of the castle; I
must then return to look after the child who is in our care.’

The giant, thereupon, carried the man to within about a hundred leagues
of the castle, where he left him, saying, ‘You will be able to walk the
remainder of the way yourself.’ The man journeyed on day and night
till he reached the golden castle of Stromberg. He found it situated,
however, on a glass mountain, and looking up from the foot he saw the
enchanted maiden drive round her castle and then go inside. He was
overjoyed to see her, and longed to get to the top of the mountain, but
the sides were so slippery that every time he attempted to climb he
fell back again. When he saw that it was impossible to reach her, he was
greatly grieved, and said to himself, ‘I will remain here and wait for
her,’ so he built himself a little hut, and there he sat and watched for
a whole year, and every day he saw the king’s daughter driving round her
castle, but still was unable to get nearer to her.

Looking out from his hut one day he saw three robbers fighting and he
called out to them, ‘God be with you.’ They stopped when they heard the
call, but looking round and seeing nobody, they went on again with their
fighting, which now became more furious. ‘God be with you,’ he cried
again, and again they paused and looked about, but seeing no one went
back to their fighting. A third time he called out, ‘God be with you,’
and then thinking he should like to know the cause of dispute between
the three men, he went out and asked them why they were fighting so
angrily with one another. One of them said that he had found a stick,
and that he had but to strike it against any door through which he
wished to pass, and it immediately flew open. Another told him that he
had found a cloak which rendered its wearer invisible; and the third had
caught a horse which would carry its rider over any obstacle, and even
up the glass mountain. They had been unable to decide whether they
would keep together and have the things in common, or whether they would
separate. On hearing this, the man said, ‘I will give you something in
exchange for those three things; not money, for that I have not got,
but something that is of far more value. I must first, however, prove
whether all you have told me about your three things is true.’ The
robbers, therefore, made him get on the horse, and handed him the stick
and the cloak, and when he had put this round him he was no longer
visible. Then he fell upon them with the stick and beat them one after
another, crying, ‘There, you idle vagabonds, you have got what you
deserve; are you satisfied now!’

After this he rode up the glass mountain. When he reached the gate of
the castle, he found it closed, but he gave it a blow with his stick,
and it flew wide open at once and he passed through. He mounted the
steps and entered the room where the maiden was sitting, with a golden
goblet full of wine in front of her. She could not see him for he still
wore his cloak. He took the ring which she had given him off his finger,
and threw it into the goblet, so that it rang as it touched the bottom.
‘That is my own ring,’ she exclaimed, ‘and if that is so the man must
also be here who is coming to set me free.’

She sought for him about the castle, but could find him nowhere.
Meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off
the cloak. When therefore she came to the castle gate she saw him, and
cried aloud for joy. Then he dismounted and took her in his arms; and
she kissed him, and said, ‘Now you have indeed set me free, and tomorrow
we will celebrate our marriage.’




THE GOLDEN GOOSE

There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
Dummling,[*] and was despised, mocked, and sneered at on every occasion.

It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood,
and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a
bottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst.

When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who bade
him good day, and said: ‘Do give me a piece of cake out of your pocket,
and let me have a draught of your wine; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ But
the clever son answered: ‘If I give you my cake and wine, I shall have
none for myself; be off with you,’ and he left the little man standing
and went on.

But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he made a
false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm, so that he had to go home
and have it bound up. And this was the little grey man’s doing.

After this the second son went into the forest, and his mother gave him,
like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine. The little old grey man
met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of wine.
But the second son, too, said sensibly enough: ‘What I give you will be
taken away from myself; be off!’ and he left the little man standing and
went on. His punishment, however, was not delayed; when he had made a
few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg, so that he had to be
carried home.

Then Dummling said: ‘Father, do let me go and cut wood.’ The father
answered: ‘Your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone,
you do not understand anything about it.’ But Dummling begged so long
that at last he said: ‘Just go then, you will get wiser by hurting
yourself.’ His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the
cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.

When he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise,
and greeting him, said: ‘Give me a piece of your cake and a drink out
of your bottle; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ Dummling answered: ‘I have
only cinder-cake and sour beer; if that pleases you, we will sit
down and eat.’ So they sat down, and when Dummling pulled out his
cinder-cake, it was a fine sweet cake, and the sour beer had become good
wine. So they ate and drank, and after that the little man said: ‘Since
you have a good heart, and are willing to divide what you have, I will
give you good luck. There stands an old tree, cut it down, and you will
find something at the roots.’ Then the little man took leave of him.

Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was a goose
sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her up, and
taking her with him, went to an inn where he thought he would stay the
night. Now the host had three daughters, who saw the goose and were
curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, and would have
liked to have one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought: ‘I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a
feather,’ and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose by
the wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.

The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get a
feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she
was held fast.

At last the third also came with the like intent, and the others
screamed out: ‘Keep away; for goodness’ sake keep away!’ But she did
not understand why she was to keep away. ‘The others are there,’ she
thought, ‘I may as well be there too,’ and ran to them; but as soon as
she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her. So they
had to spend the night with the goose.

The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out,
without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to
it. They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, now right,
wherever his legs took him.

In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw the
procession he said: ‘For shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why are you
running across the fields after this young man? Is that seemly?’ At the
same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away,
but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, and was himself
obliged to run behind.

Before long the sexton came by and saw his master, the parson, running
behind three girls. He was astonished at this and called out: ‘Hi!
your reverence, whither away so quickly? Do not forget that we have a
christening today!’ and running after him he took him by the sleeve, but
was also held fast to it.

Whilst the five were trotting thus one behind the other, two labourers
came with their hoes from the fields; the parson called out to them
and begged that they would set him and the sexton free. But they had
scarcely touched the sexton when they were held fast, and now there were
seven of them running behind Dummling and the goose.

Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had a daughter
who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. So he had put forth
a decree that whosoever should be able to make her laugh should marry
her. When Dummling heard this, he went with his goose and all her train
before the king’s daughter, and as soon as she saw the seven people
running on and on, one behind the other, she began to laugh quite
loudly, and as if she would never stop. Thereupon Dummling asked to have
her for his wife; but the king did not like the son-in-law, and made all
manner of excuses and said he must first produce a man who could drink
a cellarful of wine. Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could
certainly help him; so he went into the forest, and in the same place
where he had felled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very
sorrowful face. Dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so
sorely, and he answered: ‘I have such a great thirst and cannot quench
it; cold water I cannot stand, a barrel of wine I have just emptied, but
that to me is like a drop on a hot stone!’

‘There, I can help you,’ said Dummling, ‘just come with me and you shall
be satisfied.’

He led him into the king’s cellar, and the man bent over the huge
barrels, and drank and drank till his loins hurt, and before the day was
out he had emptied all the barrels. Then Dummling asked once more
for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow, whom
everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and he made a
new condition; he must first find a man who could eat a whole mountain
of bread. Dummling did not think long, but went straight into the
forest, where in the same place there sat a man who was tying up his
body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying: ‘I have eaten a
whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when one has such a hunger
as I? My stomach remains empty, and I must tie myself up if I am not to
die of hunger.’

At this Dummling was glad, and said: ‘Get up and come with me; you shall
eat yourself full.’ He led him to the king’s palace where all the
flour in the whole Kingdom was collected, and from it he caused a huge
mountain of bread to be baked. The man from the forest stood before it,
began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountain had vanished.
Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride; but the king again
sought a way out, and ordered a ship which could sail on land and on
water. ‘As soon as you come sailing back in it,’ said he, ‘you shall
have my daughter for wife.’

Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little grey
man to whom he had given his cake. When he heard what Dummling wanted,
he said: ‘Since you have given me to eat and to drink, I will give you
the ship; and I do all this because you once were kind to me.’ Then he
gave him the ship which could sail on land and water, and when the king
saw that, he could no longer prevent him from having his daughter. The
wedding was celebrated, and after the king’s death, Dummling inherited
his kingdom and lived for a long time contentedly with his wife.

     [*] Simpleton




THE WATER OF LIFE

Long before you or I were born, there reigned, in a country a great way
off, a king who had three sons. This king once fell very ill--so ill
that nobody thought he could live. His sons were very much grieved
at their father’s sickness; and as they were walking together very
mournfully in the garden of the palace, a little old man met them and
asked what was the matter. They told him that their father was very ill,
and that they were afraid nothing could save him. ‘I know what would,’
said the little old man; ‘it is the Water of Life. If he could have a
draught of it he would be well again; but it is very hard to get.’ Then
the eldest son said, ‘I will soon find it’: and he went to the sick
king, and begged that he might go in search of the Water of Life, as
it was the only thing that could save him. ‘No,’ said the king. ‘I had
rather die than place you in such great danger as you must meet with in
your journey.’ But he begged so hard that the king let him go; and the
prince thought to himself, ‘If I bring my father this water, he will
make me sole heir to his kingdom.’

Then he set out: and when he had gone on his way some time he came to a
deep valley, overhung with rocks and woods; and as he looked around, he
saw standing above him on one of the rocks a little ugly dwarf, with a
sugarloaf cap and a scarlet cloak; and the dwarf called to him and said,
‘Prince, whither so fast?’ ‘What is that to thee, you ugly imp?’ said
the prince haughtily, and rode on.

But the dwarf was enraged at his behaviour, and laid a fairy spell
of ill-luck upon him; so that as he rode on the mountain pass became
narrower and narrower, and at last the way was so straitened that he
could not go to step forward: and when he thought to have turned his
horse round and go back the way he came, he heard a loud laugh ringing
round him, and found that the path was closed behind him, so that he was
shut in all round. He next tried to get off his horse and make his way
on foot, but again the laugh rang in his ears, and he found himself
unable to move a step, and thus he was forced to abide spellbound.

Meantime the old king was lingering on in daily hope of his son’s
return, till at last the second son said, ‘Father, I will go in search
of the Water of Life.’ For he thought to himself, ‘My brother is surely
dead, and the kingdom will fall to me if I find the water.’ The king was
at first very unwilling to let him go, but at last yielded to his wish.
So he set out and followed the same road which his brother had done,
and met with the same elf, who stopped him at the same spot in the
mountains, saying, as before, ‘Prince, prince, whither so fast?’ ‘Mind
your own affairs, busybody!’ said the prince scornfully, and rode on.

But the dwarf put the same spell upon him as he put on his elder
brother, and he, too, was at last obliged to take up his abode in the
heart of the mountains. Thus it is with proud silly people, who think
themselves above everyone else, and are too proud to ask or take advice.

When the second prince had thus been gone a long time, the youngest son
said he would go and search for the Water of Life, and trusted he should
soon be able to make his father well again. So he set out, and the dwarf
met him too at the same spot in the valley, among the mountains, and
said, ‘Prince, whither so fast?’ And the prince said, ‘I am going in
search of the Water of Life, because my father is ill, and like to die:
can you help me? Pray be kind, and aid me if you can!’ ‘Do you know
where it is to be found?’ asked the dwarf. ‘No,’ said the prince, ‘I do
not. Pray tell me if you know.’ ‘Then as you have spoken to me kindly,
and are wise enough to seek for advice, I will tell you how and where to
go. The water you seek springs from a well in an enchanted castle; and,
that you may be able to reach it in safety, I will give you an iron wand
and two little loaves of bread; strike the iron door of the castle three
times with the wand, and it will open: two hungry lions will be lying
down inside gaping for their prey, but if you throw them the bread they
will let you pass; then hasten on to the well, and take some of the
Water of Life before the clock strikes twelve; for if you tarry longer
the door will shut upon you for ever.’

Then the prince thanked his little friend with the scarlet cloak for his
friendly aid, and took the wand and the bread, and went travelling on
and on, over sea and over land, till he came to his journey’s end, and
found everything to be as the dwarf had told him. The door flew open at
the third stroke of the wand, and when the lions were quieted he went on
through the castle and came at length to a beautiful hall. Around it he
saw several knights sitting in a trance; then he pulled off their rings
and put them on his own fingers. In another room he saw on a table a
sword and a loaf of bread, which he also took. Further on he came to a
room where a beautiful young lady sat upon a couch; and she welcomed him
joyfully, and said, if he would set her free from the spell that bound
her, the kingdom should be his, if he would come back in a year and
marry her. Then she told him that the well that held the Water of Life
was in the palace gardens; and bade him make haste, and draw what he
wanted before the clock struck twelve.

He walked on; and as he walked through beautiful gardens he came to a
delightful shady spot in which stood a couch; and he thought to himself,
as he felt tired, that he would rest himself for a while, and gaze on
the lovely scenes around him. So he laid himself down, and sleep
fell upon him unawares, so that he did not wake up till the clock was
striking a quarter to twelve. Then he sprang from the couch dreadfully
frightened, ran to the well, filled a cup that was standing by him full
of water, and hastened to get away in time. Just as he was going out of
the iron door it struck twelve, and the door fell so quickly upon him
that it snapped off a piece of his heel.

When he found himself safe, he was overjoyed to think that he had got
the Water of Life; and as he was going on his way homewards, he passed
by the little dwarf, who, when he saw the sword and the loaf, said, ‘You
have made a noble prize; with the sword you can at a blow slay whole
armies, and the bread will never fail you.’ Then the prince thought
to himself, ‘I cannot go home to my father without my brothers’; so he
said, ‘My dear friend, cannot you tell me where my two brothers are, who
set out in search of the Water of Life before me, and never came back?’
‘I have shut them up by a charm between two mountains,’ said the dwarf,
‘because they were proud and ill-behaved, and scorned to ask advice.’
The prince begged so hard for his brothers, that the dwarf at last set
them free, though unwillingly, saying, ‘Beware of them, for they have
bad hearts.’ Their brother, however, was greatly rejoiced to see them,
and told them all that had happened to him; how he had found the Water
of Life, and had taken a cup full of it; and how he had set a beautiful
princess free from a spell that bound her; and how she had engaged to
wait a whole year, and then to marry him, and to give him the kingdom.

Then they all three rode on together, and on their way home came to a
country that was laid waste by war and a dreadful famine, so that it was
feared all must die for want. But the prince gave the king of the land
the bread, and all his kingdom ate of it. And he lent the king the
wonderful sword, and he slew the enemy’s army with it; and thus the
kingdom was once more in peace and plenty. In the same manner he
befriended two other countries through which they passed on their way.

When they came to the sea, they got into a ship and during their voyage
the two eldest said to themselves, ‘Our brother has got the water which
we could not find, therefore our father will forsake us and give him the
kingdom, which is our right’; so they were full of envy and revenge, and
agreed together how they could ruin him. Then they waited till he was
fast asleep, and poured the Water of Life out of the cup, and took it
for themselves, giving him bitter sea-water instead.

When they came to their journey’s end, the youngest son brought his cup
to the sick king, that he might drink and be healed. Scarcely, however,
had he tasted the bitter sea-water when he became worse even than he was
before; and then both the elder sons came in, and blamed the youngest
for what they had done; and said that he wanted to poison their father,
but that they had found the Water of Life, and had brought it with them.
He no sooner began to drink of what they brought him, than he felt his
sickness leave him, and was as strong and well as in his younger days.
Then they went to their brother, and laughed at him, and said, ‘Well,
brother, you found the Water of Life, did you? You have had the trouble
and we shall have the reward. Pray, with all your cleverness, why did
not you manage to keep your eyes open? Next year one of us will take
away your beautiful princess, if you do not take care. You had better
say nothing about this to our father, for he does not believe a word you
say; and if you tell tales, you shall lose your life into the bargain:
but be quiet, and we will let you off.’

The old king was still very angry with his youngest son, and thought
that he really meant to have taken away his life; so he called his court
together, and asked what should be done, and all agreed that he ought to
be put to death. The prince knew nothing of what was going on, till one
day, when the king’s chief huntsmen went a-hunting with him, and they
were alone in the wood together, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that
the prince said, ‘My friend, what is the matter with you?’ ‘I cannot and
dare not tell you,’ said he. But the prince begged very hard, and said,
‘Only tell me what it is, and do not think I shall be angry, for I will
forgive you.’ ‘Alas!’ said the huntsman; ‘the king has ordered me to
shoot you.’ The prince started at this, and said, ‘Let me live, and I
will change dresses with you; you shall take my royal coat to show to my
father, and do you give me your shabby one.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
the huntsman; ‘I am sure I shall be glad to save you, for I could not
have shot you.’ Then he took the prince’s coat, and gave him the shabby
one, and went away through the wood.

Some time after, three grand embassies came to the old king’s court,
with rich gifts of gold and precious stones for his youngest son; now
all these were sent from the three kings to whom he had lent his sword
and loaf of bread, in order to rid them of their enemy and feed their
people. This touched the old king’s heart, and he thought his son might
still be guiltless, and said to his court, ‘O that my son were still
alive! how it grieves me that I had him killed!’ ‘He is still alive,’
said the huntsman; ‘and I am glad that I had pity on him, but let him
go in peace, and brought home his royal coat.’ At this the king was
overwhelmed with joy, and made it known throughout all his kingdom, that
if his son would come back to his court he would forgive him.

Meanwhile the princess was eagerly waiting till her deliverer should
come back; and had a road made leading up to her palace all of shining
gold; and told her courtiers that whoever came on horseback, and rode
straight up to the gate upon it, was her true lover; and that they must
let him in: but whoever rode on one side of it, they must be sure was
not the right one; and that they must send him away at once.

The time soon came, when the eldest brother thought that he would make
haste to go to the princess, and say that he was the one who had set
her free, and that he should have her for his wife, and the kingdom with
her. As he came before the palace and saw the golden road, he stopped to
look at it, and he thought to himself, ‘It is a pity to ride upon this
beautiful road’; so he turned aside and rode on the right-hand side of
it. But when he came to the gate, the guards, who had seen the road
he took, said to him, he could not be what he said he was, and must go
about his business.

The second prince set out soon afterwards on the same errand; and when
he came to the golden road, and his horse had set one foot upon it,
he stopped to look at it, and thought it very beautiful, and said to
himself, ‘What a pity it is that anything should tread here!’ Then he
too turned aside and rode on the left side of it. But when he came to
the gate the guards said he was not the true prince, and that he too
must go away about his business; and away he went.

Now when the full year was come round, the third brother left the forest
in which he had lain hid for fear of his father’s anger, and set out in
search of his betrothed bride. So he journeyed on, thinking of her all
the way, and rode so quickly that he did not even see what the road was
made of, but went with his horse straight over it; and as he came to the
gate it flew open, and the princess welcomed him with joy, and said
he was her deliverer, and should now be her husband and lord of the
kingdom. When the first joy at their meeting was over, the princess told
him she had heard of his father having forgiven him, and of his wish to
have him home again: so, before his wedding with the princess, he went
to visit his father, taking her with him. Then he told him everything;
how his brothers had cheated and robbed him, and yet that he had borne
all those wrongs for the love of his father. And the old king was very
angry, and wanted to punish his wicked sons; but they made their escape,
and got into a ship and sailed away over the wide sea, and where they
went to nobody knew and nobody cared.

And now the old king gathered together his court, and asked all his
kingdom to come and celebrate the wedding of his son and the princess.
And young and old, noble and squire, gentle and simple, came at once
on the summons; and among the rest came the friendly dwarf, with the
sugarloaf hat, and a new scarlet cloak.

  And the wedding was held, and the merry bells run.
  And all the good people they danced and they sung,
  And feasted and frolick’d I can’t tell how long.




THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN

There was once a king’s son who had a bride whom he loved very much. And
when he was sitting beside her and very happy, news came that his father
lay sick unto death, and desired to see him once again before his end.
Then he said to his beloved: ‘I must now go and leave you, I give you
a ring as a remembrance of me. When I am king, I will return and fetch
you.’ So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was
dangerously ill, and near his death. He said to him: ‘Dear son, I wished
to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as I wish,’ and
he named a certain king’s daughter who was to be his wife. The son was
in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing, and said: ‘Yes,
dear father, your will shall be done,’ and thereupon the king shut his
eyes, and died.

When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time of
mourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he had given
his father, and caused the king’s daughter to be asked in marriage, and
she was promised to him. His first betrothed heard of this, and fretted
so much about his faithfulness that she nearly died. Then her father
said to her: ‘Dearest child, why are you so sad? You shall have
whatsoever you will.’ She thought for a moment and said: ‘Dear father,
I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in face, figure, and size.’
The father said: ‘If it be possible, your desire shall be fulfilled,’
and he caused a search to be made in his whole kingdom, until eleven
young maidens were found who exactly resembled his daughter in face,
figure, and size.

When they came to the king’s daughter, she had twelve suits of
huntsmen’s clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to put
on the huntsmen’s clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.
Thereupon she took her leave of her father, and rode away with them,
and rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.
Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take all of
them into his service. The king looked at her and did not know her, but
as they were such handsome fellows, he said: ‘Yes,’ and that he would
willingly take them, and now they were the king’s twelve huntsmen.

The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew
all concealed and secret things. It came to pass that one evening he
said to the king: ‘You think you have twelve huntsmen?’ ‘Yes,’ said the
king, ‘they are twelve huntsmen.’ The lion continued: ‘You are mistaken,
they are twelve girls.’ The king said: ‘That cannot be true! How
will you prove that to me?’ ‘Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the
ante-chamber,’ answered the lion, ‘and then you will soon see. Men have
a firm step, and when they walk over peas none of them stir, but girls
trip and skip, and drag their feet, and the peas roll about.’ The king
was well pleased with the counsel, and caused the peas to be strewn.

There was, however, a servant of the king’s who favoured the huntsmen,
and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he went to
them and repeated everything, and said: ‘The lion wants to make the king
believe that you are girls.’ Then the king’s daughter thanked him, and
said to her maidens: ‘Show some strength, and step firmly on the peas.’
So next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmen called before
him, and they came into the ante-chamber where the peas were lying, they
stepped so firmly on them, and had such a strong, sure walk, that not
one of the peas either rolled or stirred. Then they went away again,
and the king said to the lion: ‘You have lied to me, they walk just like
men.’ The lion said: ‘They have been informed that they were going to
be put to the test, and have assumed some strength. Just let twelve
spinning-wheels be brought into the ante-chamber, and they will go to
them and be pleased with them, and that is what no man would do.’
The king liked the advice, and had the spinning-wheels placed in the
ante-chamber.

But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,
and disclosed the project. So when they were alone the king’s daughter
said to her eleven girls: ‘Show some constraint, and do not look round
at the spinning-wheels.’ And next morning when the king had his twelve
huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber, and never once
looked at the spinning-wheels. Then the king again said to the lion:
‘You have deceived me, they are men, for they have not looked at the
spinning-wheels.’ The lion replied: ‘They have restrained themselves.’
The king, however, would no longer believe the lion.

The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and his
liking for them continually increased. Now it came to pass that
once when they were out hunting, news came that the king’s bride was
approaching. When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so much that
her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to the ground. The
king thought something had happened to his dear huntsman, ran up to him,
wanted to help him, and drew his glove off. Then he saw the ring which
he had given to his first bride, and when he looked in her face he
recognized her. Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and
when she opened her eyes he said: ‘You are mine, and I am yours, and
no one in the world can alter that.’ He sent a messenger to the other
bride, and entreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wife
already, and someone who had just found an old key did not require a new
one. Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again taken
into favour, because, after all, he had told the truth.




THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN

There was once a merchant who had only one child, a son, that was very
young, and barely able to run alone. He had two richly laden ships then
making a voyage upon the seas, in which he had embarked all his wealth,
in the hope of making great gains, when the news came that both were
lost. Thus from being a rich man he became all at once so very poor that
nothing was left to him but one small plot of land; and there he often
went in an evening to take his walk, and ease his mind of a little of
his trouble.

One day, as he was roaming along in a brown study, thinking with no
great comfort on what he had been and what he now was, and was like
to be, all on a sudden there stood before him a little, rough-looking,
black dwarf. ‘Prithee, friend, why so sorrowful?’ said he to the
merchant; ‘what is it you take so deeply to heart?’ ‘If you would do me
any good I would willingly tell you,’ said the merchant. ‘Who knows but
I may?’ said the little man: ‘tell me what ails you, and perhaps you
will find I may be of some use.’ Then the merchant told him how all his
wealth was gone to the bottom of the sea, and how he had nothing left
but that little plot of land. ‘Oh, trouble not yourself about that,’
said the dwarf; ‘only undertake to bring me here, twelve years hence,
whatever meets you first on your going home, and I will give you as much
as you please.’ The merchant thought this was no great thing to ask;
that it would most likely be his dog or his cat, or something of that
sort, but forgot his little boy Heinel; so he agreed to the bargain, and
signed and sealed the bond to do what was asked of him.

But as he drew near home, his little boy was so glad to see him that he
crept behind him, and laid fast hold of his legs, and looked up in
his face and laughed. Then the father started, trembling with fear and
horror, and saw what it was that he had bound himself to do; but as no
gold was come, he made himself easy by thinking that it was only a joke
that the dwarf was playing him, and that, at any rate, when the money
came, he should see the bearer, and would not take it in.

About a month afterwards he went upstairs into a lumber-room to look
for some old iron, that he might sell it and raise a little money; and
there, instead of his iron, he saw a large pile of gold lying on the
floor. At the sight of this he was overjoyed, and forgetting all about
his son, went into trade again, and became a richer merchant than
before.

Meantime little Heinel grew up, and as the end of the twelve years drew
near the merchant began to call to mind his bond, and became very sad
and thoughtful; so that care and sorrow were written upon his face. The
boy one day asked what was the matter, but his father would not tell for
some time; at last, however, he said that he had, without knowing it,
sold him for gold to a little, ugly-looking, black dwarf, and that the
twelve years were coming round when he must keep his word. Then Heinel
said, ‘Father, give yourself very little trouble about that; I shall be
too much for the little man.’

When the time came, the father and son went out together to the place
agreed upon: and the son drew a circle on the ground, and set himself
and his father in the middle of it. The little black dwarf soon came,
and walked round and round about the circle, but could not find any way
to get into it, and he either could not, or dared not, jump over it. At
last the boy said to him. ‘Have you anything to say to us, my friend, or
what do you want?’ Now Heinel had found a friend in a good fairy, that
was fond of him, and had told him what to do; for this fairy knew what
good luck was in store for him. ‘Have you brought me what you said you
would?’ said the dwarf to the merchant. The old man held his tongue, but
Heinel said again, ‘What do you want here?’ The dwarf said, ‘I come to
talk with your father, not with you.’ ‘You have cheated and taken in my
father,’ said the son; ‘pray give him up his bond at once.’ ‘Fair and
softly,’ said the little old man; ‘right is right; I have paid my money,
and your father has had it, and spent it; so be so good as to let me
have what I paid it for.’ ‘You must have my consent to that first,’ said
Heinel, ‘so please to step in here, and let us talk it over.’ The old
man grinned, and showed his teeth, as if he should have been very glad
to get into the circle if he could. Then at last, after a long talk,
they came to terms. Heinel agreed that his father must give him up, and
that so far the dwarf should have his way: but, on the other hand, the
fairy had told Heinel what fortune was in store for him, if he followed
his own course; and he did not choose to be given up to his hump-backed
friend, who seemed so anxious for his company.

So, to make a sort of drawn battle of the matter, it was settled that
Heinel should be put into an open boat, that lay on the sea-shore hard
by; that the father should push him off with his own hand, and that he
should thus be set adrift, and left to the bad or good luck of wind and
weather. Then he took leave of his father, and set himself in the boat,
but before it got far off a wave struck it, and it fell with one side
low in the water, so the merchant thought that poor Heinel was lost, and
went home very sorrowful, while the dwarf went his way, thinking that at
any rate he had had his revenge.

The boat, however, did not sink, for the good fairy took care of her
friend, and soon raised the boat up again, and it went safely on. The
young man sat safe within, till at length it ran ashore upon an unknown
land. As he jumped upon the shore he saw before him a beautiful castle
but empty and dreary within, for it was enchanted. ‘Here,’ said he to
himself, ‘must I find the prize the good fairy told me of.’ So he once
more searched the whole palace through, till at last he found a white
snake, lying coiled up on a cushion in one of the chambers.

Now the white snake was an enchanted princess; and she was very glad
to see him, and said, ‘Are you at last come to set me free? Twelve
long years have I waited here for the fairy to bring you hither as she
promised, for you alone can save me. This night twelve men will come:
their faces will be black, and they will be dressed in chain armour.
They will ask what you do here, but give no answer; and let them do
what they will--beat, whip, pinch, prick, or torment you--bear all; only
speak not a word, and at twelve o’clock they must go away. The second
night twelve others will come: and the third night twenty-four, who
will even cut off your head; but at the twelfth hour of that night their
power is gone, and I shall be free, and will come and bring you the
Water of Life, and will wash you with it, and bring you back to life
and health.’ And all came to pass as she had said; Heinel bore all, and
spoke not a word; and the third night the princess came, and fell on his
neck and kissed him. Joy and gladness burst forth throughout the castle,
the wedding was celebrated, and he was crowned king of the Golden
Mountain.

They lived together very happily, and the queen had a son. And thus
eight years had passed over their heads, when the king thought of his
father; and he began to long to see him once again. But the queen was
against his going, and said, ‘I know well that misfortunes will come
upon us if you go.’ However, he gave her no rest till she agreed. At his
going away she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, ‘Take this ring, and
put it on your finger; whatever you wish it will bring you; only promise
never to make use of it to bring me hence to your father’s house.’ Then
he said he would do what she asked, and put the ring on his finger, and
wished himself near the town where his father lived.

Heinel found himself at the gates in a moment; but the guards would
not let him go in, because he was so strangely clad. So he went up to a
neighbouring hill, where a shepherd dwelt, and borrowed his old frock,
and thus passed unknown into the town. When he came to his father’s
house, he said he was his son; but the merchant would not believe him,
and said he had had but one son, his poor Heinel, who he knew was long
since dead: and as he was only dressed like a poor shepherd, he would
not even give him anything to eat. The king, however, still vowed that
he was his son, and said, ‘Is there no mark by which you would know me
if I am really your son?’ ‘Yes,’ said his mother, ‘our Heinel had a mark
like a raspberry on his right arm.’ Then he showed them the mark, and
they knew that what he had said was true.

He next told them how he was king of the Golden Mountain, and was
married to a princess, and had a son seven years old. But the merchant
said, ‘that can never be true; he must be a fine king truly who travels
about in a shepherd’s frock!’ At this the son was vexed; and forgetting
his word, turned his ring, and wished for his queen and son. In an
instant they stood before him; but the queen wept, and said he had
broken his word, and bad luck would follow. He did all he could to
soothe her, and she at last seemed to be appeased; but she was not so in
truth, and was only thinking how she should punish him.

One day he took her to walk with him out of the town, and showed her
the spot where the boat was set adrift upon the wide waters. Then he sat
himself down, and said, ‘I am very much tired; sit by me, I will rest my
head in your lap, and sleep a while.’ As soon as he had fallen asleep,
however, she drew the ring from his finger, and crept softly away, and
wished herself and her son at home in their kingdom. And when he awoke
he found himself alone, and saw that the ring was gone from his finger.
‘I can never go back to my father’s house,’ said he; ‘they would say I
am a sorcerer: I will journey forth into the world, till I come again to
my kingdom.’

So saying he set out and travelled till he came to a hill, where three
giants were sharing their father’s goods; and as they saw him pass they
cried out and said, ‘Little men have sharp wits; he shall part the goods
between us.’ Now there was a sword that cut off an enemy’s head whenever
the wearer gave the words, ‘Heads off!’; a cloak that made the owner
invisible, or gave him any form he pleased; and a pair of boots that
carried the wearer wherever he wished. Heinel said they must first let
him try these wonderful things, then he might know how to set a value
upon them. Then they gave him the cloak, and he wished himself a fly,
and in a moment he was a fly. ‘The cloak is very well,’ said he: ‘now
give me the sword.’ ‘No,’ said they; ‘not unless you undertake not to
say, “Heads off!” for if you do we are all dead men.’ So they gave it
him, charging him to try it on a tree. He next asked for the boots also;
and the moment he had all three in his power, he wished himself at
the Golden Mountain; and there he was at once. So the giants were left
behind with no goods to share or quarrel about.

As Heinel came near his castle he heard the sound of merry music; and
the people around told him that his queen was about to marry another
husband. Then he threw his cloak around him, and passed through the
castle hall, and placed himself by the side of the queen, where no one
saw him. But when anything to eat was put upon her plate, he took it
away and ate it himself; and when a glass of wine was handed to her, he
took it and drank it; and thus, though they kept on giving her meat and
drink, her plate and cup were always empty.

Upon this, fear and remorse came over her, and she went into her chamber
alone, and sat there weeping; and he followed her there. ‘Alas!’ said
she to herself, ‘was I not once set free? Why then does this enchantment
still seem to bind me?’

‘False and fickle one!’ said he. ‘One indeed came who set thee free, and
he is now near thee again; but how have you used him? Ought he to
have had such treatment from thee?’ Then he went out and sent away the
company, and said the wedding was at an end, for that he was come back
to the kingdom. But the princes, peers, and great men mocked at him.
However, he would enter into no parley with them, but only asked them
if they would go in peace or not. Then they turned upon him and tried
to seize him; but he drew his sword. ‘Heads Off!’ cried he; and with the
word the traitors’ heads fell before him, and Heinel was once more king
of the Golden Mountain.




DOCTOR KNOWALL

There was once upon a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove with
two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor for two
talers. When the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that
the doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how well he
ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and would willingly
have been a doctor too. So he remained standing a while, and at length
inquired if he too could not be a doctor. ‘Oh, yes,’ said the doctor,
‘that is soon managed.’ ‘What must I do?’ asked the peasant. ‘In the
first place buy yourself an A B C book of the kind which has a cock on
the frontispiece; in the second, turn your cart and your two oxen into
money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever else pertains to
medicine; thirdly, have a sign painted for yourself with the words: “I
am Doctor Knowall,” and have that nailed up above your house-door.’ The
peasant did everything that he had been told to do. When he had doctored
people awhile, but not long, a rich and great lord had some money
stolen. Then he was told about Doctor Knowall who lived in such and such
a village, and must know what had become of the money. So the lord had
the horses harnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and
asked Crabb if he were Doctor Knowall. Yes, he was, he said. Then he was
to go with him and bring back the stolen money. ‘Oh, yes, but Grete, my
wife, must go too.’ The lord was willing, and let both of them have a
seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together. When they came
to the nobleman’s castle, the table was spread, and Crabb was told to
sit down and eat. ‘Yes, but my wife, Grete, too,’ said he, and he seated
himself with her at the table. And when the first servant came with a
dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said: ‘Grete,
that was the first,’ meaning that was the servant who brought the first
dish. The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say: ‘That is
the first thief,’ and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said
to his comrade outside: ‘The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he
said I was the first.’ The second did not want to go in at all, but was
forced. So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wife,
and said: ‘Grete, that is the second.’ This servant was equally alarmed,
and he got out as fast as he could. The third fared no better, for the
peasant again said: ‘Grete, that is the third.’ The fourth had to carry
in a dish that was covered, and the lord told the doctor that he was to
show his skill, and guess what was beneath the cover. Actually, there
were crabs. The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and
cried: ‘Ah, poor Crabb.’ When the lord heard that, he cried: ‘There! he
knows it; he must also know who has the money!’

On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the
doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment. When therefore
he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen
the money, and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a
heavy sum into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he
did they would be hanged. They led him to the spot where the money was
concealed. With this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall,
sat down to the table, and said: ‘My lord, now will I search in my book
where the gold is hidden.’ The fifth servant, however, crept into the
stove to hear if the doctor knew still more. But the doctor sat still
and opened his A B C book, turned the pages backwards and forwards, and
looked for the cock. As he could not find it immediately he said: ‘I
know you are there, so you had better come out!’ Then the fellow in the
stove thought that the doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out,
crying: ‘That man knows everything!’ Then Doctor Knowall showed the lord
where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received
from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.




THE SEVEN RAVENS

There was once a man who had seven sons, and last of all one daughter.
Although the little girl was very pretty, she was so weak and small that
they thought she could not live; but they said she should at once be
christened.

So the father sent one of his sons in haste to the spring to get some
water, but the other six ran with him. Each wanted to be first at
drawing the water, and so they were in such a hurry that all let their
pitchers fall into the well, and they stood very foolishly looking at
one another, and did not know what to do, for none dared go home. In the
meantime the father was uneasy, and could not tell what made the
young men stay so long. ‘Surely,’ said he, ‘the whole seven must have
forgotten themselves over some game of play’; and when he had waited
still longer and they yet did not come, he flew into a rage and wished
them all turned into ravens. Scarcely had he spoken these words when he
heard a croaking over his head, and looked up and saw seven ravens as
black as coal flying round and round. Sorry as he was to see his wish
so fulfilled, he did not know how what was done could be undone, and
comforted himself as well as he could for the loss of his seven sons
with his dear little daughter, who soon became stronger and every day
more beautiful.

For a long time she did not know that she had ever had any brothers; for
her father and mother took care not to speak of them before her: but one
day by chance she heard the people about her speak of them. ‘Yes,’ said
they, ‘she is beautiful indeed, but still ‘tis a pity that her brothers
should have been lost for her sake.’ Then she was much grieved, and went
to her father and mother, and asked if she had any brothers, and what
had become of them. So they dared no longer hide the truth from her, but
said it was the will of Heaven, and that her birth was only the innocent
cause of it; but the little girl mourned sadly about it every day, and
thought herself bound to do all she could to bring her brothers back;
and she had neither rest nor ease, till at length one day she stole
away, and set out into the wide world to find her brothers, wherever
they might be, and free them, whatever it might cost her.

She took nothing with her but a little ring which her father and mother
had given her, a loaf of bread in case she should be hungry, a little
pitcher of water in case she should be thirsty, and a little stool
to rest upon when she should be weary. Thus she went on and on, and
journeyed till she came to the world’s end; then she came to the sun,
but the sun looked much too hot and fiery; so she ran away quickly to
the moon, but the moon was cold and chilly, and said, ‘I smell flesh
and blood this way!’ so she took herself away in a hurry and came to the
stars, and the stars were friendly and kind to her, and each star sat
upon his own little stool; but the morning star rose up and gave her a
little piece of wood, and said, ‘If you have not this little piece of
wood, you cannot unlock the castle that stands on the glass-mountain,
and there your brothers live.’ The little girl took the piece of wood,
rolled it up in a little cloth, and went on again until she came to the
glass-mountain, and found the door shut. Then she felt for the little
piece of wood; but when she unwrapped the cloth it was not there, and
she saw she had lost the gift of the good stars. What was to be done?
She wanted to save her brothers, and had no key of the castle of the
glass-mountain; so this faithful little sister took a knife out of her
pocket and cut off her little finger, that was just the size of the
piece of wood she had lost, and put it in the door and opened it.

As she went in, a little dwarf came up to her, and said, ‘What are you
seeking for?’ ‘I seek for my brothers, the seven ravens,’ answered she.
Then the dwarf said, ‘My masters are not at home; but if you will wait
till they come, pray step in.’ Now the little dwarf was getting their
dinner ready, and he brought their food upon seven little plates, and
their drink in seven little glasses, and set them upon the table, and
out of each little plate their sister ate a small piece, and out of each
little glass she drank a small drop; but she let the ring that she had
brought with her fall into the last glass.

On a sudden she heard a fluttering and croaking in the air, and the
dwarf said, ‘Here come my masters.’ When they came in, they wanted to
eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses. Then said
one after the other,

‘Who has eaten from my little plate? And who has been drinking out of my
little glass?’

 ‘Caw! Caw! well I ween
  Mortal lips have this way been.’

When the seventh came to the bottom of his glass, and found there the
ring, he looked at it, and knew that it was his father’s and mother’s,
and said, ‘O that our little sister would but come! then we should be
free.’ When the little girl heard this (for she stood behind the door
all the time and listened), she ran forward, and in an instant all
the ravens took their right form again; and all hugged and kissed each
other, and went merrily home.




THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX


FIRST STORY

There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, who believed that
his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to put her to the test. He
stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved
as if he were stone dead. Mrs Fox went up to her room, shut herself in,
and her maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking. When it
became known that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.
The maid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking. She went
and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said:

 ‘What may you be about, Miss Cat?
  Do you sleep or do you wake?’

She answered:

 ‘I am not sleeping, I am waking,
  Would you know what I am making?
  I am boiling warm beer with butter,
  Will you be my guest for supper?’

‘No, thank you, miss,’ said the fox, ‘what is Mrs Fox doing?’ The maid
replied:

 ‘She is sitting in her room,
  Moaning in her gloom,
  Weeping her little eyes quite red,
  Because old Mr Fox is dead.’

‘Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would like to woo
her.’ ‘Certainly, young sir.’

  The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,
  The door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,
 ‘Mistress Fox, are you inside?’
 ‘Oh, yes, my little cat,’ she cried.
 ‘A wooer he stands at the door out there.’
 ‘What does he look like, my dear?’

‘Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late Mr Fox?’ ‘Oh, no,’ answered
the cat, ‘he has only one.’ ‘Then I will not have him.’

Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away. Soon afterwards there
was another knock, and another fox was at the door who wished to woo Mrs
Fox. He had two tails, but he did not fare better than the first. After
this still more came, each with one tail more than the other, but they
were all turned away, until at last one came who had nine tails, like
old Mr Fox. When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat:

 ‘Now open the gates and doors all wide,
  And carry old Mr Fox outside.’

But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old Mr Fox stirred
under the bench, and cudgelled all the rabble, and drove them and Mrs
Fox out of the house.


SECOND STORY

When old Mr Fox was dead, the wolf came as a suitor, and knocked at the
door, and the cat who was servant to Mrs Fox, opened it for him. The
wolf greeted her, and said:

 ‘Good day, Mrs Cat of Kehrewit,
  How comes it that alone you sit?
  What are you making good?’

The cat replied:

 ‘In milk I’m breaking bread so sweet,
  Will you be my guest, and eat?’

‘No, thank you, Mrs Cat,’ answered the wolf. ‘Is Mrs Fox not at home?’

The cat said:

 ‘She sits upstairs in her room,
  Bewailing her sorrowful doom,
  Bewailing her trouble so sore,
  For old Mr Fox is no more.’

The wolf answered:

 ‘If she’s in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please her to step below?’
  The cat runs quickly up the stair,
  And lets her tail fly here and there,
  Until she comes to the parlour door.
  With her five gold rings at the door she knocks:
 ‘Are you within, good Mistress Fox?
  If you’re in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please you to step below?

Mrs Fox asked: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a pointed
mouth?’ ‘No,’ answered the cat. ‘Then he won’t do for me.’

When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion, and
all the beasts of the forest, one after the other. But one of the good
qualities which old Mr Fox had possessed, was always lacking, and the
cat had continually to send the suitors away. At length came a young
fox. Then Mrs Fox said: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has a
little pointed mouth?’ ‘Yes,’ said the cat, ‘he has.’ ‘Then let him come
upstairs,’ said Mrs Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding
feast.

 ‘Sweep me the room as clean as you can,
  Up with the window, fling out my old man!
  For many a fine fat mouse he brought,
  Yet of his wife he never thought,
  But ate up every one he caught.’

Then the wedding was solemnized with young Mr Fox, and there was much
rejoicing and dancing; and if they have not left off, they are dancing
still.




THE SALAD

As a merry young huntsman was once going briskly along through a wood,
there came up a little old woman, and said to him, ‘Good day, good day;
you seem merry enough, but I am hungry and thirsty; do pray give me
something to eat.’ The huntsman took pity on her, and put his hand in
his pocket and gave her what he had. Then he wanted to go his way; but
she took hold of him, and said, ‘Listen, my friend, to what I am going
to tell you; I will reward you for your kindness; go your way, and after
a little time you will come to a tree where you will see nine birds
sitting on a cloak. Shoot into the midst of them, and one will fall down
dead: the cloak will fall too; take it, it is a wishing-cloak, and when
you wear it you will find yourself at any place where you may wish to
be. Cut open the dead bird, take out its heart and keep it, and you will
find a piece of gold under your pillow every morning when you rise. It
is the bird’s heart that will bring you this good luck.’

The huntsman thanked her, and thought to himself, ‘If all this does
happen, it will be a fine thing for me.’ When he had gone a hundred
steps or so, he heard a screaming and chirping in the branches over him,
and looked up and saw a flock of birds pulling a cloak with their bills
and feet; screaming, fighting, and tugging at each other as if
each wished to have it himself. ‘Well,’ said the huntsman, ‘this is
wonderful; this happens just as the old woman said’; then he shot into
the midst of them so that their feathers flew all about. Off went the
flock chattering away; but one fell down dead, and the cloak with it.
Then the huntsman did as the old woman told him, cut open the bird, took
out the heart, and carried the cloak home with him.

The next morning when he awoke he lifted up his pillow, and there lay
the piece of gold glittering underneath; the same happened next day, and
indeed every day when he arose. He heaped up a great deal of gold, and
at last thought to himself, ‘Of what use is this gold to me whilst I am
at home? I will go out into the world and look about me.’

Then he took leave of his friends, and hung his bag and bow about his
neck, and went his way. It so happened that his road one day led through
a thick wood, at the end of which was a large castle in a green meadow,
and at one of the windows stood an old woman with a very beautiful young
lady by her side looking about them. Now the old woman was a witch, and
said to the young lady, ‘There is a young man coming out of the wood who
carries a wonderful prize; we must get it away from him, my dear child,
for it is more fit for us than for him. He has a bird’s heart that
brings a piece of gold under his pillow every morning.’ Meantime the
huntsman came nearer and looked at the lady, and said to himself, ‘I
have been travelling so long that I should like to go into this castle
and rest myself, for I have money enough to pay for anything I want’;
but the real reason was, that he wanted to see more of the beautiful
lady. Then he went into the house, and was welcomed kindly; and it was
not long before he was so much in love that he thought of nothing else
but looking at the lady’s eyes, and doing everything that she wished.
Then the old woman said, ‘Now is the time for getting the bird’s heart.’
So the lady stole it away, and he never found any more gold under his
pillow, for it lay now under the young lady’s, and the old woman took it
away every morning; but he was so much in love that he never missed his
prize.

‘Well,’ said the old witch, ‘we have got the bird’s heart, but not the
wishing-cloak yet, and that we must also get.’ ‘Let us leave him that,’
said the young lady; ‘he has already lost his wealth.’ Then the witch
was very angry, and said, ‘Such a cloak is a very rare and wonderful
thing, and I must and will have it.’ So she did as the old woman told
her, and set herself at the window, and looked about the country and
seemed very sorrowful; then the huntsman said, ‘What makes you so sad?’
‘Alas! dear sir,’ said she, ‘yonder lies the granite rock where all the
costly diamonds grow, and I want so much to go there, that whenever I
think of it I cannot help being sorrowful, for who can reach it? only
the birds and the flies--man cannot.’ ‘If that’s all your grief,’ said
the huntsman, ‘I’ll take you there with all my heart’; so he drew her under
his cloak, and the moment he wished to be on the granite mountain they
were both there. The diamonds glittered so on all sides that they were
delighted with the sight and picked up the finest. But the old witch
made a deep sleep come upon him, and he said to the young lady, ‘Let us
sit down and rest ourselves a little, I am so tired that I cannot stand
any longer.’ So they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap and
fell asleep; and whilst he was sleeping on she took the cloak from
his shoulders, hung it on her own, picked up the diamonds, and wished
herself home again.

When he awoke and found that his lady had tricked him, and left him
alone on the wild rock, he said, ‘Alas! what roguery there is in the
world!’ and there he sat in great grief and fear, not knowing what to
do. Now this rock belonged to fierce giants who lived upon it; and as
he saw three of them striding about, he thought to himself, ‘I can only
save myself by feigning to be asleep’; so he laid himself down as if he
were in a sound sleep. When the giants came up to him, the first pushed
him with his foot, and said, ‘What worm is this that lies here curled
up?’ ‘Tread upon him and kill him,’ said the second. ‘It’s not worth the
trouble,’ said the third; ‘let him live, he’ll go climbing higher up the
mountain, and some cloud will come rolling and carry him away.’ And they
passed on. But the huntsman had heard all they said; and as soon as they
were gone, he climbed to the top of the mountain, and when he had sat
there a short time a cloud came rolling around him, and caught him in a
whirlwind and bore him along for some time, till it settled in a garden,
and he fell quite gently to the ground amongst the greens and cabbages.

Then he looked around him, and said, ‘I wish I had something to eat, if
not I shall be worse off than before; for here I see neither apples
nor pears, nor any kind of fruits, nothing but vegetables.’ At last he
thought to himself, ‘I can eat salad, it will refresh and strengthen
me.’ So he picked out a fine head and ate of it; but scarcely had he
swallowed two bites when he felt himself quite changed, and saw with
horror that he was turned into an ass. However, he still felt very
hungry, and the salad tasted very nice; so he ate on till he came
to another kind of salad, and scarcely had he tasted it when he felt
another change come over him, and soon saw that he was lucky enough to
have found his old shape again.

Then he laid himself down and slept off a little of his weariness; and
when he awoke the next morning he broke off a head both of the good and
the bad salad, and thought to himself, ‘This will help me to my fortune
again, and enable me to pay off some folks for their treachery.’ So he
went away to try and find the castle of his friends; and after wandering
about a few days he luckily found it. Then he stained his face all over
brown, so that even his mother would not have known him, and went into
the castle and asked for a lodging; ‘I am so tired,’ said he, ‘that I
can go no farther.’ ‘Countryman,’ said the witch, ‘who are you? and what
is your business?’ ‘I am,’ said he, ‘a messenger sent by the king to
find the finest salad that grows under the sun. I have been lucky
enough to find it, and have brought it with me; but the heat of the sun
scorches so that it begins to wither, and I don’t know that I can carry
it farther.’

When the witch and the young lady heard of his beautiful salad, they
longed to taste it, and said, ‘Dear countryman, let us just taste it.’
‘To be sure,’ answered he; ‘I have two heads of it with me, and will
give you one’; so he opened his bag and gave them the bad. Then the
witch herself took it into the kitchen to be dressed; and when it was
ready she could not wait till it was carried up, but took a few leaves
immediately and put them in her mouth, and scarcely were they swallowed
when she lost her own form and ran braying down into the court in the
form of an ass. Now the servant-maid came into the kitchen, and seeing
the salad ready, was going to carry it up; but on the way she too felt a
wish to taste it as the old woman had done, and ate some leaves; so she
also was turned into an ass and ran after the other, letting the dish
with the salad fall on the ground. The messenger sat all this time with
the beautiful young lady, and as nobody came with the salad and she
longed to taste it, she said, ‘I don’t know where the salad can be.’
Then he thought something must have happened, and said, ‘I will go
into the kitchen and see.’ And as he went he saw two asses in the court
running about, and the salad lying on the ground. ‘All right!’ said
he; ‘those two have had their share.’ Then he took up the rest of
the leaves, laid them on the dish and brought them to the young lady,
saying, ‘I bring you the dish myself that you may not wait any longer.’
So she ate of it, and like the others ran off into the court braying
away.

Then the huntsman washed his face and went into the court that they
might know him. ‘Now you shall be paid for your roguery,’ said he; and
tied them all three to a rope and took them along with him till he
came to a mill and knocked at the window. ‘What’s the matter?’ said the
miller. ‘I have three tiresome beasts here,’ said the other; ‘if you
will take them, give them food and room, and treat them as I tell you,
I will pay you whatever you ask.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said the miller;
‘but how shall I treat them?’ Then the huntsman said, ‘Give the old
one stripes three times a day and hay once; give the next (who was
the servant-maid) stripes once a day and hay three times; and give
the youngest (who was the beautiful lady) hay three times a day and
no stripes’: for he could not find it in his heart to have her beaten.
After this he went back to the castle, where he found everything he
wanted.

Some days after, the miller came to him and told him that the old ass
was dead; ‘The other two,’ said he, ‘are alive and eat, but are so
sorrowful that they cannot last long.’ Then the huntsman pitied them,
and told the miller to drive them back to him, and when they came, he
gave them some of the good salad to eat. And the beautiful young lady
fell upon her knees before him, and said, ‘O dearest huntsman! forgive
me all the ill I have done you; my mother forced me to it, it was
against my will, for I always loved you very much. Your wishing-cloak
hangs up in the closet, and as for the bird’s heart, I will give it you
too.’ But he said, ‘Keep it, it will be just the same thing, for I mean
to make you my wife.’ So they were married, and lived together very
happily till they died.




THE STORY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FORTH TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS

A certain father had two sons, the elder of who was smart and sensible,
and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and could neither
learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him they said:
‘There’s a fellow who will give his father some trouble!’ When anything
had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced to do it; but
if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late, or in the
night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any other dismal
place, he answered: ‘Oh, no father, I’ll not go there, it makes me
shudder!’ for he was afraid. Or when stories were told by the fire at
night which made the flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said: ‘Oh,
it makes us shudder!’ The younger sat in a corner and listened with
the rest of them, and could not imagine what they could mean. ‘They are
always saying: “It makes me shudder, it makes me shudder!” It does not
make me shudder,’ thought he. ‘That, too, must be an art of which I
understand nothing!’

Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day: ‘Hearken to me,
you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong, and you
too must learn something by which you can earn your bread. Look how your
brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.’ ‘Well, father,’ he
replied, ‘I am quite willing to learn something--indeed, if it could but
be managed, I should like to learn how to shudder. I don’t understand
that at all yet.’ The elder brother smiled when he heard that, and
thought to himself: ‘Goodness, what a blockhead that brother of mine is!
He will never be good for anything as long as he lives! He who wants to
be a sickle must bend himself betimes.’

The father sighed, and answered him: ‘You shall soon learn what it is to
shudder, but you will not earn your bread by that.’

Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father
bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward
in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing. ‘Just think,’
said he, ‘when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread, he
actually wanted to learn to shudder.’ ‘If that be all,’ replied the
sexton, ‘he can learn that with me. Send him to me, and I will soon
polish him.’ The father was glad to do it, for he thought: ‘It will
train the boy a little.’ The sexton therefore took him into his house,
and he had to ring the church bell. After a day or two, the sexton awoke
him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into the church tower and
ring the bell. ‘You shall soon learn what shuddering is,’ thought he,
and secretly went there before him; and when the boy was at the top of
the tower and turned round, and was just going to take hold of the bell
rope, he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite the sounding
hole. ‘Who is there?’ cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did
not move or stir. ‘Give an answer,’ cried the boy, ‘or take yourself
off, you have no business here at night.’

The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might
think he was a ghost. The boy cried a second time: ‘What do you want
here?--speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down the
steps!’ The sexton thought: ‘He can’t mean to be as bad as his words,’
uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone. Then the boy
called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no purpose,
he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so that it fell
down the ten steps and remained lying there in a corner. Thereupon he
rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went to bed, and
fell asleep. The sexton’s wife waited a long time for her husband, but
he did not come back. At length she became uneasy, and wakened the boy,
and asked: ‘Do you know where my husband is? He climbed up the tower
before you did.’ ‘No, I don’t know,’ replied the boy, ‘but someone was
standing by the sounding hole on the other side of the steps, and as he
would neither give an answer nor go away, I took him for a scoundrel,
and threw him downstairs. Just go there and you will see if it was he.
I should be sorry if it were.’ The woman ran away and found her husband,
who was lying moaning in the corner, and had broken his leg.

She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy’s father, ‘Your boy,’ cried she, ‘has been the cause of a great
misfortune! He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke his
leg. Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.’ The father was
terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy. ‘What wicked tricks
are these?’ said he. ‘The devil must have put them into your head.’
‘Father,’ he replied, ‘do listen to me. I am quite innocent. He was
standing there by night like one intent on doing evil. I did not know
who it was, and I entreated him three times either to speak or to go
away.’ ‘Ah,’ said the father, ‘I have nothing but unhappiness with you.
Go out of my sight. I will see you no more.’

‘Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day. Then will I
go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me.’ ‘Learn what you will,’ spoke
the father, ‘it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers for you.
Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from whence you
come, and who is your father, for I have reason to be ashamed of you.’
‘Yes, father, it shall be as you will. If you desire nothing more than
that, I can easily keep it in mind.’

When the day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!’ Then a man
approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with
himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they could
see the gallows, the man said to him: ‘Look, there is the tree where
seven men have married the ropemaker’s daughter, and are now learning
how to fly. Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes, and you will
soon learn how to shudder.’ ‘If that is all that is wanted,’ answered
the youth, ‘it is easily done; but if I learn how to shudder as fast as
that, you shall have my fifty talers. Just come back to me early in the
morning.’ Then the youth went to the gallows, sat down beneath it, and
waited till evening came. And as he was cold, he lighted himself a fire,
but at midnight the wind blew so sharply that in spite of his fire, he
could not get warm. And as the wind knocked the hanged men against each
other, and they moved backwards and forwards, he thought to himself:
‘If you shiver below by the fire, how those up above must freeze and
suffer!’ And as he felt pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed
up, unbound one of them after the other, and brought down all seven.
Then he stoked the fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm
themselves. But they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught
their clothes. So he said: ‘Take care, or I will hang you up again.’ The
dead men, however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their
rags go on burning. At this he grew angry, and said: ‘If you will not
take care, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,’ and he hung
them up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fell
asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty talers, and said: ‘Well do you know how to shudder?’ ‘No,’
answered he, ‘how should I know? Those fellows up there did not open
their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which
they had on their bodies get burnt.’ Then the man saw that he would not
get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying: ‘Such a youth has
never come my way before.’

The youth likewise went his way, and once more began to mutter to
himself: ‘Ah, if I could but shudder! Ah, if I could but shudder!’ A
waggoner who was striding behind him heard this and asked: ‘Who are
you?’ ‘I don’t know,’ answered the youth. Then the waggoner asked: ‘From
whence do you come?’ ‘I know not.’ ‘Who is your father?’ ‘That I may
not tell you.’ ‘What is it that you are always muttering between your
teeth?’ ‘Ah,’ replied the youth, ‘I do so wish I could shudder, but
no one can teach me how.’ ‘Enough of your foolish chatter,’ said the
waggoner. ‘Come, go with me, I will see about a place for you.’ The
youth went with the waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn
where they wished to pass the night. Then at the entrance of the parlour
the youth again said quite loudly: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could
but shudder!’ The host who heard this, laughed and said: ‘If that is
your desire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.’ ‘Ah,
be silent,’ said the hostess, ‘so many prying persons have already lost
their lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as
these should never see the daylight again.’

But the youth said: ‘However difficult it may be, I will learn it. For
this purpose indeed have I journeyed forth.’ He let the host have
no rest, until the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a
haunted castle where anyone could very easily learn what shuddering was,
if he would but watch in it for three nights. The king had promised that
he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was the
most beautiful maiden the sun shone on. Likewise in the castle lay great
treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these treasures would
then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough. Already many men
had gone into the castle, but as yet none had come out again. Then the
youth went next morning to the king, and said: ‘If it be allowed, I will
willingly watch three nights in the haunted castle.’

The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, he said: ‘You may
ask for three things to take into the castle with you, but they must
be things without life.’ Then he answered: ‘Then I ask for a fire, a
turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.’

The king had these things carried into the castle for him during the
day. When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself
a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knife
beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe. ‘Ah, if I could
but shudder!’ said he, ‘but I shall not learn it here either.’ Towards
midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing it,
something cried suddenly from one corner: ‘Au, miau! how cold we are!’
‘You fools!’ cried he, ‘what are you crying about? If you are cold, come
and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.’ And when he had said
that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap and sat down
on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with their fiery
eyes. After a short time, when they had warmed themselves, they said:
‘Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?’ ‘Why not?’ he replied, ‘but
just show me your paws.’ Then they stretched out their claws. ‘Oh,’ said
he, ‘what long nails you have! Wait, I must first cut them for you.’
Thereupon he seized them by the throats, put them on the cutting-board
and screwed their feet fast. ‘I have looked at your fingers,’ said he,
‘and my fancy for card-playing has gone,’ and he struck them dead and
threw them out into the water. But when he had made away with these two,
and was about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and
corner came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more
and more of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled
horribly, and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put
it out. He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were
going too far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried: ‘Away with you,
vermin,’ and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the others
he killed, and threw out into the fish-pond. When he came back he fanned
the embers of his fire again and warmed himself. And as he thus sat, his
eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire to sleep. Then he
looked round and saw a great bed in the corner. ‘That is the very thing
for me,’ said he, and got into it. When he was just going to shut his
eyes, however, the bed began to move of its own accord, and went over
the whole of the castle. ‘That’s right,’ said he, ‘but go faster.’ Then
the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it, up and down,
over thresholds and stairs, but suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside
down, and lay on him like a mountain. But he threw quilts and pillows up
in the air, got out and said: ‘Now anyone who likes, may drive,’ and
lay down by his fire, and slept till it was day. In the morning the king
came, and when he saw him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil
spirits had killed him and he was dead. Then said he: ‘After all it is a
pity,--for so handsome a man.’ The youth heard it, got up, and said: ‘It
has not come to that yet.’ Then the king was astonished, but very glad,
and asked how he had fared. ‘Very well indeed,’ answered he; ‘one
night is past, the two others will pass likewise.’ Then he went to the
innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said: ‘I never expected to
see you alive again! Have you learnt how to shudder yet?’ ‘No,’ said he,
‘it is all in vain. If someone would but tell me!’

The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song: ‘If I could but shudder!’ When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard; at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder. Then it was quiet for
a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down the
chimney and fell before him. ‘Hullo!’ cried he, ‘another half belongs
to this. This is not enough!’ Then the uproar began again, there was a
roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise. ‘Wait,’ said
he, ‘I will just stoke up the fire a little for you.’ When he had done
that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together, and a
hideous man was sitting in his place. ‘That is no part of our bargain,’
said the youth, ‘the bench is mine.’ The man wanted to push him away;
the youth, however, would not allow that, but thrust him off with all
his strength, and seated himself again in his own place. Then still more
men fell down, one after the other; they brought nine dead men’s legs
and two skulls, and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The
youth also wanted to play and said: ‘Listen you, can I join you?’ ‘Yes,
if you have any money.’ ‘Money enough,’ replied he, ‘but your balls are
not quite round.’ Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and
turned them till they were round. ‘There, now they will roll better!’
said he. ‘Hurrah! now we’ll have fun!’ He played with them and lost some
of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished from his
sight. He lay down and quietly fell asleep. Next morning the king came
to inquire after him. ‘How has it fared with you this time?’ asked he.
‘I have been playing at nine-pins,’ he answered, ‘and have lost a couple
of farthings.’ ‘Have you not shuddered then?’ ‘What?’ said he, ‘I have
had a wonderful time! If I did but know what it was to shudder!’

The third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly:
‘If I could but shudder.’ When it grew late, six tall men came in and
brought a coffin. Then he said: ‘Ha, ha, that is certainly my little
cousin, who died only a few days ago,’ and he beckoned with his finger,
and cried: ‘Come, little cousin, come.’ They placed the coffin on the
ground, but he went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay
therein. He felt his face, but it was cold as ice. ‘Wait,’ said he, ‘I
will warm you a little,’ and went to the fire and warmed his hand and
laid it on the dead man’s face, but he remained cold. Then he took him
out, and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his
arms that the blood might circulate again. As this also did no good, he
thought to himself: ‘When two people lie in bed together, they warm each
other,’ and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down by
him. After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began to move.
Then said the youth, ‘See, little cousin, have I not warmed you?’ The
dead man, however, got up and cried: ‘Now will I strangle you.’

‘What!’ said he, ‘is that the way you thank me? You shall at once go
into your coffin again,’ and he took him up, threw him into it, and shut
the lid. Then came the six men and carried him away again. ‘I cannot
manage to shudder,’ said he. ‘I shall never learn it here as long as I
live.’

Then a man entered who was taller than all others, and looked terrible.
He was old, however, and had a long white beard. ‘You wretch,’ cried he,
‘you shall soon learn what it is to shudder, for you shall die.’ ‘Not so
fast,’ replied the youth. ‘If I am to die, I shall have to have a say
in it.’ ‘I will soon seize you,’ said the fiend. ‘Softly, softly, do not
talk so big. I am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.’
‘We shall see,’ said the old man. ‘If you are stronger, I will let you
go--come, we will try.’ Then he led him by dark passages to a smith’s
forge, took an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.
‘I can do better than that,’ said the youth, and went to the other
anvil. The old man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his
white beard hung down. Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil
with one blow, and in it caught the old man’s beard. ‘Now I have you,’
said the youth. ‘Now it is your turn to die.’ Then he seized an iron bar
and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop, when he
would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and let him go.
The old man led him back into the castle, and in a cellar showed him
three chests full of gold. ‘Of these,’ said he, ‘one part is for the
poor, the other for the king, the third yours.’ In the meantime it
struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the youth stood in
darkness. ‘I shall still be able to find my way out,’ said he, and felt
about, found the way into the room, and slept there by his fire.
Next morning the king came and said: ‘Now you must have learnt what
shuddering is?’ ‘No,’ he answered; ‘what can it be? My dead cousin was
here, and a bearded man came and showed me a great deal of money down
below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.’ ‘Then,’ said the
king, ‘you have saved the castle, and shall marry my daughter.’ ‘That
is all very well,’ said he, ‘but still I do not know what it is to
shudder!’

Then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated; but howsoever
much the young king loved his wife, and however happy he was, he still
said always: ‘If I could but shudder--if I could but shudder.’ And this
at last angered her. Her waiting-maid said: ‘I will find a cure for him;
he shall soon learn what it is to shudder.’ She went out to the stream
which flowed through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons
brought to her. At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was
to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucket full of cold water
with the gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would
sprawl about him. Then he woke up and cried: ‘Oh, what makes me shudder
so?--what makes me shudder so, dear wife? Ah! now I know what it is to
shudder!’




KING GRISLY-BEARD

A great king of a land far away in the East had a daughter who was very
beautiful, but so proud, and haughty, and conceited, that none of the
princes who came to ask her in marriage was good enough for her, and she
only made sport of them.

Once upon a time the king held a great feast, and asked thither all
her suitors; and they all sat in a row, ranged according to their
rank--kings, and princes, and dukes, and earls, and counts, and barons,
and knights. Then the princess came in, and as she passed by them she
had something spiteful to say to every one. The first was too fat: ‘He’s
as round as a tub,’ said she. The next was too tall: ‘What a maypole!’
said she. The next was too short: ‘What a dumpling!’ said she. The
fourth was too pale, and she called him ‘Wallface.’ The fifth was too
red, so she called him ‘Coxcomb.’ The sixth was not straight enough;
so she said he was like a green stick, that had been laid to dry over
a baker’s oven. And thus she had some joke to crack upon every one: but
she laughed more than all at a good king who was there. ‘Look at
him,’ said she; ‘his beard is like an old mop; he shall be called
Grisly-beard.’ So the king got the nickname of Grisly-beard.

But the old king was very angry when he saw how his daughter behaved,
and how she ill-treated all his guests; and he vowed that, willing or
unwilling, she should marry the first man, be he prince or beggar, that
came to the door.

Two days after there came by a travelling fiddler, who began to play
under the window and beg alms; and when the king heard him, he said,
‘Let him come in.’ So they brought in a dirty-looking fellow; and when
he had sung before the king and the princess, he begged a boon. Then the
king said, ‘You have sung so well, that I will give you my daughter for
your wife.’ The princess begged and prayed; but the king said, ‘I have
sworn to give you to the first comer, and I will keep my word.’ So words
and tears were of no avail; the parson was sent for, and she was married
to the fiddler. When this was over the king said, ‘Now get ready to
go--you must not stay here--you must travel on with your husband.’

Then the fiddler went his way, and took her with him, and they soon came
to a great wood. ‘Pray,’ said she, ‘whose is this wood?’ ‘It belongs
to King Grisly-beard,’ answered he; ‘hadst thou taken him, all had been
thine.’ ‘Ah! unlucky wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘would that I had
married King Grisly-beard!’ Next they came to some fine meadows. ‘Whose
are these beautiful green meadows?’ said she. ‘They belong to King
Grisly-beard, hadst thou taken him, they had all been thine.’ ‘Ah!
unlucky wretch that I am!’ said she; ‘would that I had married King
Grisly-beard!’

Then they came to a great city. ‘Whose is this noble city?’ said she.
‘It belongs to King Grisly-beard; hadst thou taken him, it had all been
thine.’ ‘Ah! wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘why did I not marry King
Grisly-beard?’ ‘That is no business of mine,’ said the fiddler: ‘why
should you wish for another husband? Am not I good enough for you?’

At last they came to a small cottage. ‘What a paltry place!’ said she;
‘to whom does that little dirty hole belong?’ Then the fiddler said,
‘That is your and my house, where we are to live.’ ‘Where are your
servants?’ cried she. ‘What do we want with servants?’ said he; ‘you
must do for yourself whatever is to be done. Now make the fire, and put
on water and cook my supper, for I am very tired.’ But the princess knew
nothing of making fires and cooking, and the fiddler was forced to help
her. When they had eaten a very scanty meal they went to bed; but the
fiddler called her up very early in the morning to clean the house. Thus
they lived for two days: and when they had eaten up all there was in the
cottage, the man said, ‘Wife, we can’t go on thus, spending money and
earning nothing. You must learn to weave baskets.’ Then he went out and
cut willows, and brought them home, and she began to weave; but it made
her fingers very sore. ‘I see this work won’t do,’ said he: ‘try and
spin; perhaps you will do that better.’ So she sat down and tried to
spin; but the threads cut her tender fingers till the blood ran. ‘See
now,’ said the fiddler, ‘you are good for nothing; you can do no work:
what a bargain I have got! However, I’ll try and set up a trade in pots
and pans, and you shall stand in the market and sell them.’ ‘Alas!’
sighed she, ‘if any of my father’s court should pass by and see me
standing in the market, how they will laugh at me!’

But her husband did not care for that, and said she must work, if she
did not wish to die of hunger. At first the trade went well; for many
people, seeing such a beautiful woman, went to buy her wares, and paid
their money without thinking of taking away the goods. They lived on
this as long as it lasted; and then her husband bought a fresh lot of
ware, and she sat herself down with it in the corner of the market; but
a drunken soldier soon came by, and rode his horse against her stall,
and broke all her goods into a thousand pieces. Then she began to cry,
and knew not what to do. ‘Ah! what will become of me?’ said she; ‘what
will my husband say?’ So she ran home and told him all. ‘Who would
have thought you would have been so silly,’ said he, ‘as to put an
earthenware stall in the corner of the market, where everybody passes?
but let us have no more crying; I see you are not fit for this sort of
work, so I have been to the king’s palace, and asked if they did not
want a kitchen-maid; and they say they will take you, and there you will
have plenty to eat.’

Thus the princess became a kitchen-maid, and helped the cook to do all
the dirtiest work; but she was allowed to carry home some of the meat
that was left, and on this they lived.

She had not been there long before she heard that the king’s eldest son
was passing by, going to be married; and she went to one of the windows
and looked out. Everything was ready, and all the pomp and brightness of
the court was there. Then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly
which had brought her so low. And the servants gave her some of the rich
meats, which she put into her basket to take home.

All on a sudden, as she was going out, in came the king’s son in golden
clothes; and when he saw a beautiful woman at the door, he took her
by the hand, and said she should be his partner in the dance; but she
trembled for fear, for she saw that it was King Grisly-beard, who was
making sport of her. However, he kept fast hold, and led her in; and the
cover of the basket came off, so that the meats in it fell about. Then
everybody laughed and jeered at her; and she was so abashed, that she
wished herself a thousand feet deep in the earth. She sprang to the
door to run away; but on the steps King Grisly-beard overtook her, and
brought her back and said, ‘Fear me not! I am the fiddler who has lived
with you in the hut. I brought you there because I really loved you. I
am also the soldier that overset your stall. I have done all this only
to cure you of your silly pride, and to show you the folly of your
ill-treatment of me. Now all is over: you have learnt wisdom, and it is
time to hold our marriage feast.’

Then the chamberlains came and brought her the most beautiful robes; and
her father and his whole court were there already, and welcomed her home
on her marriage. Joy was in every face and every heart. The feast was
grand; they danced and sang; all were merry; and I only wish that you
and I had been of the party.




IRON HANS

There was once upon a time a king who had a great forest near his
palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a
huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back. ‘Perhaps some
accident has befallen him,’ said the king, and the next day he sent out
two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they too stayed away.
Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said: ‘Scour
the whole forest through, and do not give up until you have found all
three.’ But of these also, none came home again, none were seen again.
From that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest,
and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen
of it, but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it. This lasted for
many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himself to the king as
seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. The
king, however, would not give his consent, and said: ‘It is not safe in
there; I fear it would fare with you no better than with the others,
and you would never come out again.’ The huntsman replied: ‘Lord, I will
venture it at my own risk, of fear I know nothing.’

The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. It was
not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way, and wanted to
pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a
deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched itself out of
the water, seized it, and drew it under. When the huntsman saw that, he
went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the
water. When they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body
was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face down to his
knees. They bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle. There
was great astonishment over the wild man; the king, however, had him put
in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade the door to be opened
on pain of death, and the queen herself was to take the key into her
keeping. And from this time forth everyone could again go into the
forest with safety.

The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the
courtyard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage.
The boy ran thither and said: ‘Give me my ball out.’ ‘Not till you have
opened the door for me,’ answered the man. ‘No,’ said the boy, ‘I will
not do that; the king has forbidden it,’ and ran away. The next day he
again went and asked for his ball; the wild man said: ‘Open my door,’
but the boy would not. On the third day the king had ridden out hunting,
and the boy went once more and said: ‘I cannot open the door even if I
wished, for I have not the key.’ Then the wild man said: ‘It lies under
your mother’s pillow, you can get it there.’ The boy, who wanted to have
his ball back, cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key. The
door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers. When it
was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried
away. The boy had become afraid; he called and cried after him: ‘Oh,
wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beaten!’ The wild man turned
back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and went with hasty steps
into the forest. When the king came home, he observed the empty cage,
and asked the queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about it,
and sought the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but no one
answered. The king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, but
they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what had happened, and
much grief reigned in the royal court.

When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he took the boy
down from his shoulder, and said to him: ‘You will never see your father
and mother again, but I will keep you with me, for you have set me free,
and I have compassion on you. If you do all I bid you, you shall fare
well. Of treasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in the
world.’ He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the
next morning the man took him to a well, and said: ‘Behold, the gold
well is as bright and clear as crystal, you shall sit beside it, and
take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted. I will
come every evening to see if you have obeyed my order.’ The boy placed
himself by the brink of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a
golden snake show itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in.
As he was thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he
involuntarily put it in the water. He drew it quickly out again, but saw
that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold
off again, all was to no purpose. In the evening Iron Hans came back,
looked at the boy, and said: ‘What has happened to the well?’ ‘Nothing
nothing,’ he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that the
man might not see it. But he said: ‘You have dipped your finger into
the water, this time it may pass, but take care you do not again let
anything go in.’ By daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and
watching it. His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head,
and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well. He took it quickly
out, but it was already quite gilded. Iron Hans came, and already knew
what had happened. ‘You have let a hair fall into the well,’ said he.
‘I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the
third time then the well is polluted and you can no longer remain with
me.’

On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger,
however much it hurt him. But the time was long to him, and he looked at
the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. And as he
still bent down more and more while he was doing so, and trying to look
straight into the eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into
the water. He raised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of
his head was already golden and shone like the sun. You can imagine how
terrified the poor boy was! He took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it
round his head, in order that the man might not see it. When he came he
already knew everything, and said: ‘Take the handkerchief off.’ Then the
golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he might,
it was of no use. ‘You have not stood the trial and can stay here no
longer. Go forth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.
But as you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there is
one thing I will grant you; if you fall into any difficulty, come to the
forest and cry: “Iron Hans,” and then I will come and help you. My
power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in
abundance.’

Then the king’s son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten
paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city. There he
looked for work, but could find none, and he learnt nothing by which he
could help himself. At length he went to the palace, and asked if they
would take him in. The people about court did not at all know what use
they could make of him, but they liked him, and told him to stay. At
length the cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood
and water, and rake the cinders together. Once when it so happened that
no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the
royal table, but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen, he
kept his little cap on. Such a thing as that had never yet come under
the king’s notice, and he said: ‘When you come to the royal table you
must take your hat off.’ He answered: ‘Ah, Lord, I cannot; I have a bad
sore place on my head.’ Then the king had the cook called before him
and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his
service; and that he was to send him away at once. The cook, however,
had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.

And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear
the wind and bad weather. Once in summer when he was working alone in
the garden, the day was so warm he took his little cap off that the air
might cool him. As the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so
that the rays fell into the bedroom of the king’s daughter, and up she
sprang to see what that could be. Then she saw the boy, and cried to
him: ‘Boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.’ He put his cap on with all
haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together. When he
was ascending the stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said: ‘How
can you take the king’s daughter a garland of such common flowers? Go
quickly, and get another, and seek out the prettiest and rarest.’ ‘Oh,
no,’ replied the boy, ‘the wild ones have more scent, and will please
her better.’ When he got into the room, the king’s daughter said: ‘Take
your cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.’ He again
said: ‘I may not, I have a sore head.’ She, however, caught at his
cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his
shoulders, and it was splendid to behold. He wanted to run out, but she
held him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. With these he
departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. He took them to the
gardener, and said: ‘I present them to your children, they can play with
them.’ The following day the king’s daughter again called to him that he
was to bring her a wreath of field-flowers, and then he went in with it,
she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him,
but he held it fast with both hands. She again gave him a handful of
ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener for
playthings for his children. On the third day things went just the
same; she could not get his cap away from him, and he would not have her
money.

Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. The king gathered
together his people, and did not know whether or not he could offer any
opposition to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty
army. Then said the gardener’s boy: ‘I am grown up, and will go to the
wars also, only give me a horse.’ The others laughed, and said: ‘Seek
one for yourself when we are gone, we will leave one behind us in the
stable for you.’ When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and
led the horse out; it was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety jib,
hobblety jib; nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark
forest. When he came to the outskirts, he called ‘Iron Hans’ three
times so loudly that it echoed through the trees. Thereupon the wild man
appeared immediately, and said: ‘What do you desire?’ ‘I want a strong
steed, for I am going to the wars.’ ‘That you shall have, and still more
than you ask for.’ Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it
was not long before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that
snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained, and behind
them followed a great troop of warriors entirely equipped in iron, and
their swords flashed in the sun. The youth made over his three-legged
horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and rode at the head of the
soldiers. When he got near the battlefield a great part of the king’s
men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give
way. Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like
a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him. They
began to flee, but the youth pursued, and never stopped, until there
was not a single man left. Instead of returning to the king, however, he
conducted his troop by byways back to the forest, and called forth Iron
Hans. ‘What do you desire?’ asked the wild man. ‘Take back your horse
and your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.’ All that he
asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse. When
the king returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him, and
wished him joy of his victory. ‘I am not the one who carried away the
victory,’ said he, ‘but a strange knight who came to my assistance with
his soldiers.’ The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was,
but the king did not know, and said: ‘He followed the enemy, and I did
not see him again.’ She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but
he smiled, and said: ‘He has just come home on his three-legged horse,
and the others have been mocking him, and crying: “Here comes our
hobblety jib back again!” They asked, too: “Under what hedge have you
been lying sleeping all the time?” So he said: “I did the best of all,
and it would have gone badly without me.” And then he was still more
ridiculed.’

The king said to his daughter: ‘I will proclaim a great feast that shall
last for three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the
unknown man will show himself.’ When the feast was announced, the youth
went out to the forest, and called Iron Hans. ‘What do you desire?’
asked he. ‘That I may catch the king’s daughter’s golden apple.’ ‘It is
as safe as if you had it already,’ said Iron Hans. ‘You shall likewise
have a suit of red armour for the occasion, and ride on a spirited
chestnut-horse.’ When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took
his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one. The king’s
daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none
of them caught it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.

On the second day Iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and gave him
a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught the apple, and
he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it. The king grew
angry, and said: ‘That is not allowed; he must appear before me and tell
his name.’ He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple,
should go away again they should pursue him, and if he would not come
back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.

On the third day, he received from Iron Hans a suit of black armour and
a black horse, and again he caught the apple. But when he was riding off
with it, the king’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near
him that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword. The
youth nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently
that the helmet fell from the youth’s head, and they could see that he
had golden hair. They rode back and announced this to the king.

The following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his
boy. ‘He is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the
festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has likewise
shown my children three golden apples which he has won.’

The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again had
his little cap on his head. But the king’s daughter went up to him and
took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and
he was so handsome that all were amazed. ‘Are you the knight who came
every day to the festival, always in different colours, and who caught
the three golden apples?’ asked the king. ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘and here
the apples are,’ and he took them out of his pocket, and returned them
to the king. ‘If you desire further proof, you may see the wound which
your people gave me when they followed me. But I am likewise the knight
who helped you to your victory over your enemies.’ ‘If you can perform
such deeds as that, you are no gardener’s boy; tell me, who is your
father?’ ‘My father is a mighty king, and gold have I in plenty as great
as I require.’ ‘I well see,’ said the king, ‘that I owe my thanks to
you; can I do anything to please you?’ ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘that indeed
you can. Give me your daughter to wife.’ The maiden laughed, and said:
‘He does not stand much on ceremony, but I have already seen by his
golden hair that he was no gardener’s boy,’ and then she went and
kissed him. His father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great
delight, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear
son again. And as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music
suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately king came in with a
great retinue. He went up to the youth, embraced him and said: ‘I am
Iron Hans, and was by enchantment a wild man, but you have set me free;
all the treasures which I possess, shall be your property.’




CAT-SKIN

There was once a king, whose queen had hair of the purest gold, and was
so beautiful that her match was not to be met with on the whole face of
the earth. But this beautiful queen fell ill, and when she felt that her
end drew near she called the king to her and said, ‘Promise me that you
will never marry again, unless you meet with a wife who is as beautiful
as I am, and who has golden hair like mine.’ Then when the king in his
grief promised all she asked, she shut her eyes and died. But the king
was not to be comforted, and for a long time never thought of taking
another wife. At last, however, his wise men said, ‘this will not do;
the king must marry again, that we may have a queen.’ So messengers were
sent far and wide, to seek for a bride as beautiful as the late queen.
But there was no princess in the world so beautiful; and if there had
been, still there was not one to be found who had golden hair. So the
messengers came home, and had had all their trouble for nothing.

Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her mother,
and had the same golden hair. And when she was grown up, the king looked
at her and saw that she was just like this late queen: then he said to
his courtiers, ‘May I not marry my daughter? She is the very image of my
dead wife: unless I have her, I shall not find any bride upon the whole
earth, and you say there must be a queen.’ When the courtiers heard this
they were shocked, and said, ‘Heaven forbid that a father should marry
his daughter! Out of so great a sin no good can come.’ And his daughter
was also shocked, but hoped the king would soon give up such thoughts;
so she said to him, ‘Before I marry anyone I must have three dresses:
one must be of gold, like the sun; another must be of shining silver,
like the moon; and a third must be dazzling as the stars: besides this,
I want a mantle of a thousand different kinds of fur put together, to
which every beast in the kingdom must give a part of his skin.’ And thus
she thought he would think of the matter no more. But the king made the
most skilful workmen in his kingdom weave the three dresses: one golden,
like the sun; another silvery, like the moon; and a third sparkling,
like the stars: and his hunters were told to hunt out all the beasts in
his kingdom, and to take the finest fur out of their skins: and thus a
mantle of a thousand furs was made.

When all were ready, the king sent them to her; but she got up in the
night when all were asleep, and took three of her trinkets, a golden
ring, a golden necklace, and a golden brooch, and packed the three
dresses--of the sun, the moon, and the stars--up in a nutshell, and
wrapped herself up in the mantle made of all sorts of fur, and besmeared
her face and hands with soot. Then she threw herself upon Heaven for
help in her need, and went away, and journeyed on the whole night, till
at last she came to a large wood. As she was very tired, she sat herself
down in the hollow of a tree and soon fell asleep: and there she slept
on till it was midday.

Now as the king to whom the wood belonged was hunting in it, his dogs
came to the tree, and began to snuff about, and run round and round, and
bark. ‘Look sharp!’ said the king to the huntsmen, ‘and see what sort
of game lies there.’ And the huntsmen went up to the tree, and when they
came back again said, ‘In the hollow tree there lies a most wonderful
beast, such as we never saw before; its skin seems to be of a thousand
kinds of fur, but there it lies fast asleep.’ ‘See,’ said the king, ‘if
you can catch it alive, and we will take it with us.’ So the huntsmen
took it up, and the maiden awoke and was greatly frightened, and said,
‘I am a poor child that has neither father nor mother left; have pity on
me and take me with you.’ Then they said, ‘Yes, Miss Cat-skin, you will
do for the kitchen; you can sweep up the ashes, and do things of that
sort.’ So they put her into the coach, and took her home to the king’s
palace. Then they showed her a little corner under the staircase, where
no light of day ever peeped in, and said, ‘Cat-skin, you may lie and
sleep there.’ And she was sent into the kitchen, and made to fetch wood
and water, to blow the fire, pluck the poultry, pick the herbs, sift the
ashes, and do all the dirty work.

Thus Cat-skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully. ‘Ah! pretty
princess!’ thought she, ‘what will now become of thee?’ But it happened
one day that a feast was to be held in the king’s castle, so she said to
the cook, ‘May I go up a little while and see what is going on? I will
take care and stand behind the door.’ And the cook said, ‘Yes, you may
go, but be back again in half an hour’s time, to rake out the ashes.’
Then she took her little lamp, and went into her cabin, and took off the
fur skin, and washed the soot from off her face and hands, so that her
beauty shone forth like the sun from behind the clouds. She next opened
her nutshell, and brought out of it the dress that shone like the sun,
and so went to the feast. Everyone made way for her, for nobody knew
her, and they thought she could be no less than a king’s daughter. But
the king came up to her, and held out his hand and danced with her; and
he thought in his heart, ‘I never saw any one half so beautiful.’

When the dance was at an end she curtsied; and when the king looked
round for her, she was gone, no one knew wither. The guards that stood
at the castle gate were called in: but they had seen no one. The truth
was, that she had run into her little cabin, pulled off her dress,
blackened her face and hands, put on the fur-skin cloak, and was
Cat-skin again. When she went into the kitchen to her work, and began
to rake the ashes, the cook said, ‘Let that alone till the morning, and
heat the king’s soup; I should like to run up now and give a peep: but
take care you don’t let a hair fall into it, or you will run a chance of
never eating again.’

As soon as the cook went away, Cat-skin heated the king’s soup, and
toasted a slice of bread first, as nicely as ever she could; and when it
was ready, she went and looked in the cabin for her little golden ring,
and put it into the dish in which the soup was. When the dance was over,
the king ordered his soup to be brought in; and it pleased him so well,
that he thought he had never tasted any so good before. At the bottom
he saw a gold ring lying; and as he could not make out how it had got
there, he ordered the cook to be sent for. The cook was frightened when
he heard the order, and said to Cat-skin, ‘You must have let a hair fall
into the soup; if it be so, you will have a good beating.’ Then he went
before the king, and he asked him who had cooked the soup. ‘I did,’
answered the cook. But the king said, ‘That is not true; it was better
done than you could do it.’ Then he answered, ‘To tell the truth I did
not cook it, but Cat-skin did.’ ‘Then let Cat-skin come up,’ said the
king: and when she came he said to her, ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am a poor
child,’ said she, ‘that has lost both father and mother.’ ‘How came you
in my palace?’ asked he. ‘I am good for nothing,’ said she, ‘but to be
scullion-girl, and to have boots and shoes thrown at my head.’ ‘But how
did you get the ring that was in the soup?’ asked the king. Then she
would not own that she knew anything about the ring; so the king sent
her away again about her business.

After a time there was another feast, and Cat-skin asked the cook to let
her go up and see it as before. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘but come again in half
an hour, and cook the king the soup that he likes so much.’ Then she
ran to her little cabin, washed herself quickly, and took her dress
out which was silvery as the moon, and put it on; and when she went in,
looking like a king’s daughter, the king went up to her, and rejoiced at
seeing her again, and when the dance began he danced with her. After the
dance was at an end she managed to slip out, so slyly that the king did
not see where she was gone; but she sprang into her little cabin, and
made herself into Cat-skin again, and went into the kitchen to cook the
soup. Whilst the cook was above stairs, she got the golden necklace and
dropped it into the soup; then it was brought to the king, who ate it,
and it pleased him as well as before; so he sent for the cook, who
was again forced to tell him that Cat-skin had cooked it. Cat-skin was
brought again before the king, but she still told him that she was only
fit to have boots and shoes thrown at her head.

But when the king had ordered a feast to be got ready for the third
time, it happened just the same as before. ‘You must be a witch,
Cat-skin,’ said the cook; ‘for you always put something into your soup,
so that it pleases the king better than mine.’ However, he let her go up
as before. Then she put on her dress which sparkled like the stars, and
went into the ball-room in it; and the king danced with her again, and
thought she had never looked so beautiful as she did then. So whilst
he was dancing with her, he put a gold ring on her finger without her
seeing it, and ordered that the dance should be kept up a long time.
When it was at an end, he would have held her fast by the hand, but she
slipped away, and sprang so quickly through the crowd that he lost sight
of her: and she ran as fast as she could into her little cabin under
the stairs. But this time she kept away too long, and stayed beyond the
half-hour; so she had not time to take off her fine dress, and threw her
fur mantle over it, and in her haste did not blacken herself all over
with soot, but left one of her fingers white.

Then she ran into the kitchen, and cooked the king’s soup; and as soon
as the cook was gone, she put the golden brooch into the dish. When the
king got to the bottom, he ordered Cat-skin to be called once more, and
soon saw the white finger, and the ring that he had put on it whilst
they were dancing: so he seized her hand, and kept fast hold of it, and
when she wanted to loose herself and spring away, the fur cloak fell off
a little on one side, and the starry dress sparkled underneath it.

Then he got hold of the fur and tore it off, and her golden hair and
beautiful form were seen, and she could no longer hide herself: so she
washed the soot and ashes from her face, and showed herself to be the
most beautiful princess upon the face of the earth. But the king said,
‘You are my beloved bride, and we will never more be parted from each
other.’ And the wedding feast was held, and a merry day it was, as ever
was heard of or seen in that country, or indeed in any other.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of
the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore
white and the other red roses. She had two children who were like the
two rose-trees, and one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red.
They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children
in the world were, only Snow-white was more quiet and gentle than
Rose-red. Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields
seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with her housework, or read to her when
there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of one another that they always held each
other by the hand when they went out together, and when Snow-white said:
‘We will not leave each other,’ Rose-red answered: ‘Never so long as we
live,’ and their mother would add: ‘What one has she must share with the
other.’

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no
beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little
hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by
their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon
the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and
night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss,
and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and did not
worry on their account.

Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused
them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near
their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at them, but said nothing
and went into the forest. And when they looked round they found that
they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly
have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces
further. And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who
watches over good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat that
it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-red took care
of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother’s
bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In the winter
Snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hob. The kettle
was of brass and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished. In the
evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said: ‘Go, Snow-white, and
bolt the door,’ and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took
her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls
listened as they sat and spun. And close by them lay a lamb upon the
floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head
hidden beneath its wings.

One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, someone
knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The mother said:
‘Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveller who is seeking
shelter.’ Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a
poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black
head within the door.

Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered,
and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother’s bed. But the bear began
to speak and said: ‘Do not be afraid, I will do you no harm! I am
half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you.’

‘Poor bear,’ said the mother, ‘lie down by the fire, only take care that
you do not burn your coat.’ Then she cried: ‘Snow-white, Rose-red, come
out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.’ So they both came
out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and were not afraid
of him. The bear said: ‘Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a
little’; so they brought the broom and swept the bear’s hide clean;
and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and
comfortably. It was not long before they grew quite at home, and played
tricks with their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands,
put their feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a
hazel-switch and beat him, and when he growled they laughed. But the
bear took it all in good part, only when they were too rough he called
out: ‘Leave me alive, children,

  Snow-white, Rose-red,
  Will you beat your wooer dead?’

When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the
bear: ‘You can lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe from
the cold and the bad weather.’ As soon as day dawned the two children
let him out, and he trotted across the snow into the forest.

Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself
down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as
much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were
never fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one
morning to Snow-white: ‘Now I must go away, and cannot come back for the
whole summer.’ ‘Where are you going, then, dear bear?’ asked Snow-white.
‘I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked
dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged
to stay below and cannot work their way through; but now, when the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to
pry and steal; and what once gets into their hands, and in their caves,
does not easily see daylight again.’

Snow-white was quite sorry at his departure, and as she unbolted the
door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt
and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it seemed to Snow-white
as if she had seen gold shining through it, but she was not sure about
it. The bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the
trees.

A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest
to get firewood. There they found a big tree which lay felled on the
ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and
forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was. When
they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a
crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping about like a dog
tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried: ‘Why do you
stand there? Can you not come here and help me?’ ‘What are you up to,
little man?’ asked Rose-red. ‘You stupid, prying goose!’ answered the
dwarf: ‘I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking.
The little bit of food that we people get is immediately burnt up with
heavy logs; we do not swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I had
just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished;
but the cursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the
tree closed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white
beard; so now it is tight and I cannot get away, and the silly, sleek,
milk-faced things laugh! Ugh! how odious you are!’

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it
was caught too fast. ‘I will run and fetch someone,’ said Rose-red. ‘You
senseless goose!’ snarled the dwarf; ‘why should you fetch someone? You
are already two too many for me; can you not think of something better?’
‘Don’t be impatient,’ said Snow-white, ‘I will help you,’ and she pulled
her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay
amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it
up, grumbling to himself: ‘Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine
beard. Bad luck to you!’ and then he swung the bag upon his back, and
went off without even once looking at the children.

Some time afterwards Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a dish
of fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a large
grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
They ran to it and found it was the dwarf. ‘Where are you going?’ said
Rose-red; ‘you surely don’t want to go into the water?’ ‘I am not such
a fool!’ cried the dwarf; ‘don’t you see that the accursed fish wants
to pull me in?’ The little man had been sitting there fishing, and
unluckily the wind had tangled up his beard with the fishing-line; a
moment later a big fish made a bite and the feeble creature had not
strength to pull it out; the fish kept the upper hand and pulled the
dwarf towards him. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of
little good, for he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and
was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.

The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his
beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast
together. There was nothing to do but to bring out the scissors and cut
the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that
he screamed out: ‘Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man’s
face? Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you have
cut off the best part of it. I cannot let myself be seen by my people.
I wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!’ Then he took
out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without another word
he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the
town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. The road led them
across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn about. There
they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and
round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a
rock not far away. Immediately they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran
up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance
the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man,
and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried
with his shrill voice: ‘Could you not have done it more carefully! You
dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you
clumsy creatures!’ Then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and
slipped away again under the rock into his hole. The girls, who by
this time were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their
business in town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the
dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot,
and had not thought that anyone would come there so late. The evening
sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with
all colours so beautifully that the children stood still and stared
at them. ‘Why do you stand gaping there?’ cried the dwarf, and his
ashen-grey face became copper-red with rage. He was still cursing when a
loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out
of the forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not reach
his cave, for the bear was already close. Then in the dread of his heart
he cried: ‘Dear Mr Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treasures;
look, the beautiful jewels lying there! Grant me my life; what do you
want with such a slender little fellow as I? you would not feel me
between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender
morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy’s sake eat them!’ The
bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single
blow with his paw, and he did not move again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called to them: ‘Snow-white and
Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I will come with you.’ Then they
recognized his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly
his bearskin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in
gold. ‘I am a king’s son,’ he said, ‘and I was bewitched by that wicked
dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; I have had to run about the forest
as a savage bear until I was freed by his death. Now he has got his
well-deserved punishment.

Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and they
divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered
together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and happily with
her children for many years. She took the two rose-trees with her, and
they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful
roses, white and red.


*****


The Brothers Grimm, Jacob (1785-1863) and Wilhelm (1786-1859), were born
in Hanau, near Frankfurt, in the German state of Hesse. Throughout
their lives they remained close friends, and both studied law at Marburg
University. Jacob was a pioneer in the study of German philology,
and although Wilhelm’s work was hampered by poor health the brothers
collaborated in the creation of a German dictionary, not completed until
a century after their deaths. But they were best (and universally) known
for the collection of over two hundred folk tales they made from oral
sources and published in two volumes of ‘Nursery and Household Tales’ in
1812 and 1814. Although their intention was to preserve such material as
part of German cultural and literary history, and their collection was
first published with scholarly notes and no illustration, the tales soon
came into the possession of young readers. This was in part due to Edgar
Taylor, who made the first English translation in 1823, selecting about
fifty stories ‘with the amusement of some young friends principally in
view.’ They have been an essential ingredient of children’s reading ever
since.





End of Project Gutenberg’s Grimms’ Fairy Tales, by The Brothers Grimm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRIMMS’ FAIRY TALES ***

***** This file should be named 2591-0.txt or 2591-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/9/2591/

Produced by Emma Dudding, John Bickers, and Dagny

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of History Of Egypt, Chaldæa, Syria,
Babylonia, And Assyria In The Light Of Recent Discovery, by L.W. King and H.R. Hall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: History Of Egypt, Chaldæa, Syria, Babylonia, And Assyria In The Light Of Recent Discovery

Author: L.W. King and H.R. Hall

Release Date: December 16, 2005 [EBook #17321]
Last Updated: September 7, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF EGYPT ***




Produced by David Widger





[Illustration: Book Spines]



HISTORY OF EGYPT

CHALDEA, SYRIA, BABYLONIA, AND ASSYRIA


IN THE LIGHT OF RECENT DISCOVERY


BY L. W. KING and H. R. HALL

Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum



Containing over 1200 colored plates and illustrations.


Copyright 1906


[Illustration: Frontispiece1]

[Illustration: Frontispiece1-text]

[Illustration: Titlepage1]

[Illustration: Versa1]




PUBLISHERS’ NOTE

It should be noted that many of the monuments and sites of excavations
in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Persia, and Kurdistan described in this volume
have been visited by the authors in connection with their own work in
those countries. The greater number of the photographs here published
were taken by the authors themselves. Their thanks are due to M. Ernest
Leroux, of Paris, for his kind permission to reproduce a certain number
of plates from the works of M. de Morgan, illustrating his recent
discoveries in Egypt and Persia, and to Messrs. W. A. Mansell & Co., of
London, for kindly allowing them to make use of a number of photographs
issued by them.




PREFACE

The present volume contains an account of the most important additions
which have been made to our knowledge of the ancient history of Egypt
and Western Asia during the few years which have elapsed since the
publication of Prof. Maspero’s _Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de
l’Orient Classique_, and includes short descriptions of the excavations
from which these results have been obtained. It is in no sense a
connected and continuous history of these countries, for that has
already been written by Prof. Maspero, but is rather intended as an
appendix or addendum to his work, briefly recapitulating and describing
the discoveries made since its appearance. On this account we
have followed a geographical rather than a chronological system of
arrangement, but at the same time the attempt has been made to suggest
to the mind of the reader the historical sequence of events.

At no period have excavations been pursued with more energy and
activity, both in Egypt and Western Asia, than at the present time, and
every season’s work obliges us to modify former theories, and extends
our knowledge of periods of history which even ten years ago were
unknown to the historian. For instance, a whole chapter has been added
to Egyptian history by the discovery of the Neolithic culture of the
primitive Egyptians, while the recent excavations at Susa are revealing
a hitherto totally unsuspected epoch of proto-Elamite civilization.
Further than this, we have discovered the relics of the oldest
historical kings of Egypt, and we are now enabled to reconstitute from
material as yet unpublished the inter-relations of the early dynasties
of Babylon. Important discoveries have also been made with regard to
isolated points in the later historical periods. We have therefore
attempted to include the most important of these in our survey of recent
excavations and their results. We would again remind the reader that
Prof. Maspero’s great work must be consulted for the complete history of
the period, the present volume being, not a connected history of Egypt
and Western Asia, but a description and discussion of the manner in
which recent discovery and research have added to and modified our
conceptions of ancient Egyptian and Mesopotamian civilization.




CONTENTS


I. The Discovery of Prehistoric Egypt

II. Abydos and the First Three Dynasties

III. Memphis and the Pyramids

IV. Recent Excavations in Western Asia and the Dawn of Chaldæan History

V. Elam and Babylon, the Country of the Sea and the Kassites

VI. Early Babylonian Life and Customs

VII. Temples and Tombs of Thebes

VIII. The Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian Empires in the Light of Recent
Research

IX. The Last Days of Ancient Egypt




EGYPT AND MESOPOTAMIA

_In the Light of Recent Excavation and Research_




CHAPTER I--THE DISCOVERY OF PREHISTORIC EGYPT

During the last ten years our conception of the beginnings of Egyptian
antiquity has profoundly altered. When Prof. Maspero published the
first volume of his great _Histoire Ancienne des Peuples des l’Orient
Classique_, in 1895, Egyptian history, properly so called, still began
with the Pyramid-builders, Sne-feru, Khufu, and Khafra (Cheops and
Chephren), and the legendary lists of earlier kings preserved at Abydos
and Sakkara were still quoted as the only source of knowledge of the
time before the IVth Dynasty. Of a prehistoric Egypt nothing was known,
beyond a few flint flakes gathered here and there upon the desert
plateaus, which might or might not tell of an age when the ancestors
of the Pyramid-builders knew only the stone tools and weapons of the
primeval savage.

Now, however, the veil which has hidden the beginnings of Egyptian
civilization from us has been lifted, and we see things, more or less,
as they actually were, unobscured by the traditions of a later day.
Until the last few years nothing of the real beginnings of history in
either Egypt or Mesopotamia had been found; legend supplied the only
material for the reconstruction of the earliest history of the oldest
civilized nations of the globe. Nor was it seriously supposed that any
relics of prehistoric Egypt or Mesopotamia ever would be found. The
antiquity of the known history of these countries already appeared
so great that nobody took into consideration the possibility of our
discovering a prehistoric Egypt or Mesopotamia; the idea was too remote
from practical work. And further, civilization in these countries had
lasted so long that it seemed more than probable that all traces
of their prehistoric age had long since been swept away. Yet the
possibility, which seemed hardly worth a moment’s consideration in 1895,
is in 1905 an assured reality, at least as far as Egypt is concerned.
Prehistoric Babylonia has yet to be discovered. It is true, for example,
that at Mukay-yar, the site of ancient Ur of the Chaldees, burials
in earthenware coffins, in which the skeletons lie in the doubled-up
position characteristic of Neolithic interments, have been found; but
there is no doubt whatever that these are burials of a much later date,
belonging, quite possibly, to the Parthian period. Nothing that may
rightfully be termed prehistoric has yet been found in the Euphrates
valley, whereas in Egypt prehistoric antiquities are now almost as well
known and as well represented in our museums as are the prehistoric
antiquities of Europe and America.

With the exception of a few palasoliths from the surface of the Syrian
desert, near the Euphrates valley, not a single implement of the Age
of Stone has yet been found in Southern Mesopotamia, whereas Egypt
has yielded to us the most perfect examples of the flint-knapper’s
art known, flint tools and weapons more beautiful than the finest that
Europe and America can show. The reason is not far to seek. Southern
Mesopotamia is an alluvial country, and the ancient cities, which
doubtless mark the sites of the oldest settlements in the land, are
situated in the alluvial marshy plain between the Tigris and the
Euphrates; so that all traces of the Neolithic culture of the country
would seem to have disappeared, buried deep beneath city-mounds, clay
and marsh. It is the same in the Egyptian Delta, a similar country; and
here no traces of the prehistoric culture of Egypt have been found. The
attempt to find them was made last year at Buto, which is known to be
one of the most antique centres of civilization, and probably was one of
the earliest settlements in Egypt, but without success. The infiltration
of water had made excavation impossible and had no doubt destroyed
everything belonging to the most ancient settlement. It is not going too
far to predict that exactly the same thing will be found by any explorer
who tries to discover a Neolithic stratum beneath a city-mound of
Babylonia. There is little hope that prehistoric Chaldæa will ever be
known to us. But in Egypt the conditions are different. The Delta is
like Babylonia, it is true; but in the Upper Nile valley the river flows
down with but a thin border of alluvial land on either side, through the
rocky and hilly desert, the dry Sahara, where rain falls but once in two
or three years. Antiquities buried in this soil in the most remote
ages are preserved intact as they were first interred, until the modern
investigator comes along to look for them. And it is on the desert
margin of the valley that the remains of prehistoric Egypt have been
found. That is the reason for their perfect preservation till our own
day, and why we know prehistoric Egypt so well.

The chief work of Egyptian civilization was the proper irrigation of
the alluvial soil, the turning of marsh into cultivated fields, and the
reclamation of land from the desert for the purposes of agriculture.
Owing to the rainless character of the country, the only means
of obtaining water for the crops is by irrigation, and where the
fertilizing Nile water cannot be taken by means of canals, there
cultivation ends and the desert begins. Before Egyptian civilization,
properly so called, began, the valley was a great marsh through which
the Nile found its way north to the sea. The half-savage, stone-using
ancestors of the civilized Egyptians hunted wild fowl, crocodiles,
and hippopotami in the marshy valley; but except in a few isolated
settlements on convenient mounds here and there (the forerunners of the
later villages), they did not live there. Their settlements were on
the dry desert margin, and it was here, upon low tongues of desert hill
jutting out into the plain, that they buried their dead. Their simple
shallow graves were safe from the flood, and, but for the depredations
of jackals and hyenas, here they have remained intact till our own
day, and have yielded up to us the facts from which we have derived our
knowledge of prehistoric Egypt. Thus it is that we know so much of the
Egyptians of the Stone Age, while of their contemporaries in Mesopotamia
we know nothing, nor is anything further likely to be discovered.

But these desert cemeteries, with their crowds of oval shallow graves,
covered by only a few inches of surface soil, in which the Neolithic
Egyptians lie crouched up with their flint implements and polished
pottery beside them, are but monuments of the later age of prehistoric
Egypt. Long before the Neolithic Egyptian hunted his game in the
marshes, and here and there essayed the work of reclamation for the
purposes of an incipient agriculture, a far older race inhabited the
valley of the Nile. The written records of Egyptian civilization go back
four thousand years before Christ, or earlier, and the Neolithic Age of
Egypt must go back to a period several thousand years before that. But
we can now go back much further still, to the Palaeolithic Age of Egypt.
At a time when Europe was still covered by the ice and snows of the
Glacial Period, and man fought as an equal, hardly yet as a superior,
with cave-bear and mammoth, the Palaeolithic Egyptians lived on the
banks of the Nile. Their habitat was doubtless the desert slopes, often,
too, the plateaus themselves; but that they lived entirely upon the
plateaus, high up above the Nile marsh, is improbable. There, it is
true, we find their flint implements, the great pear-shaped weapons of
the types of Chelles, St. Acheul, and Le Moustier, types well known
to all who are acquainted with the flint implements of the “Drift” in
Europe. And it is there that the theory, generally accepted hitherto,
has placed the habitat of the makers and users of these implements.

The idea was that in Palaeolithic days, contemporary with the Glacial
Age of Northern Europe and America, the climate of Egypt was entirely
different from that of later times and of to-day. Instead of dry desert,
the mountain plateaus bordering the Nile valley were supposed to have
been then covered with forest, through which flowed countless streams
to feed the river below. It was suggested that remains of these streams
were to be seen in the side ravines, or wadis, of the Nile valley, which
run up from the low desert on the river level into the hills on either
hand. These wadis undoubtedly show extensive traces of strong water
action; they curve and twist as the streams found their easiest way
to the level through the softer strata, they are heaped up with great
water-worn boulders, they are hollowed out where waterfalls once fell.
They have the appearance of dry watercourses, exactly what any mountain
burns would be were the water-supply suddenly cut off for ever, the
climate altered from rainy to eternal sun-glare, and every plant and
tree blasted, never to grow again. Acting on the supposition that this
idea was a correct one, most observers have concluded that the climate
of Egypt in remote periods was very different from the dry, rainless one
now obtaining. To provide the water for the wadi streams, heavy
rainfall and forests are desiderated. They were easily supplied, on the
hypothesis. Forests clothed the mountain plateaus, heavy rains fell, and
the water rushed down to the Nile, carving out the great watercourses
which remain to this day, bearing testimony to the truth. And the
flints, which the Palaeolithic inhabitants of the plateau-forests made
and used, still lie on the now treeless and sun-baked desert surface.

[Illustration: 007.jpg THE BED OF AN ANCIENT WATERCOURSE IN THE WADIYÊN,
THEBES.]

This is certainly a very weak conclusion. In fact, it seriously damages
the whole argument, the water-courses to the contrary notwithstanding.
The palæoliths are there. They can be picked up by any visitor. There
they lie, great flints of the Drift types, just like those found in the
gravel-beds of England and Belgium, on the desert surface where they
were made. Undoubtedly where they were made, for the places where
they lie are the actual ancient flint workshops, where the flints were
chipped. Everywhere around are innumerable flint chips and perfect
weapons, burnt black and patinated by ages of sunlight. We are taking
one particular spot in the hills of Western Thebes as an example, but
there are plenty of others, such as the Wadi esh-Shêkh on the right bank
of the Nile opposite Maghagha, whence Mr. H. Seton-Karr has brought
back specimens of flint tools of all ages from the Palaeolithic to the
Neolithic periods.

The Palæolithic flint workshops on the Theban hills have been visited of
late years by Mr. Seton-Karr, by Prof. Schweinfurth, Mr. Allen Sturge,
and Dr. Blanckenhorn, by Mr. Portch, Mr. Ayrton, and Mr. Hall. The
weapons illustrated here were found by Messrs. Hall and Ayrton, and are
now preserved in the British Museum. Among these flints shown we notice
two fine specimens of the pear-shaped type of St. Acheul, with curious
adze-shaped implements of primitive type to left and right. Below, to
the right, is a very primitive instrument of Chellean type, being merely
a sharpened pebble. Above, to left and right, are two specimens of the
curious half-moon-shaped instruments which are characteristic of
the Theban flint field and are hardly known elsewhere. All have the
beautiful brown patina, which only ages of sunburn can give. The
“poignard” type to the left, at the bottom of the plate, is broken off
short.

[Illustration: 008.jpg Palaeolithic Implements of the Quaternary Period.
From the desert plateau and slopes west of Thebes.]

In the smaller illustration we see some remarkable types: two scrapers
or knives with strongly marked “bulb of percussion” (the spot where the
flint-knapper struck and from which the flakes flew off), a very regular
_coup-de-poing_ which looks almost like a large arrowhead, and on the
right a much weathered and patinated scraper which must be of immemorial
age.

[Illustration: 009.jpg (right): PALAEOLITHIC IMPLEMENTS. From Man,
March, 1905.]

This came from the top plateau, not from the slopes (or subsidiary
plateaus at the head of the _wadis_), as did the great St. Acheulian
weapons. The circular object is very remarkable: it is the half of the
ring of a “morpholith “(a round flinty accretion often found in the
Theban limestone) which has been split, and the split (flat) side
carefully bevelled. Several of these interesting objects have been
found in conjunction with Palæolithic implements at Thebes. No doubt the
flints lie on the actual surface where they were made. No later water
action has swept them away and covered them with gravel, no later human
habitation has hidden them with successive deposits of soil, no gradual
deposit of dust and rubbish has buried them deep. They lie as they were
left in the far-away Palæolithic Age, and they have lain there till
taken away by the modern explorer.

But this is not the case with all the Palæolithic flints of Thebes. In
the year 1882 Maj.-Gen. Pitt-Rivers discovered Palæolithic flints in the
deposit of diluvial detritus which lies between the cultivation and the
mountains on the west bank of the Nile opposite Luxor. Many of these are
of the same type as those found on the surface of the mountain plateau
which lies at the head of the great _wadi_ of the Tombs of the Kings,
while the diluvial deposit is at its mouth. The stuff of which the
detritus is composed evidently came originally from the high plateau,
and was washed down, with the flints, in ancient times.

This is quite conceivable, but how is it that the flints left behind
on the plateau remain on the original ancient surface? How is it
conceivable that if (on the old theory) these plateaus were in
Palæolithic days clothed with forest, the Palæolithic flints could even
in a single instance remain undisturbed from Palæolithic times to the
present day, when the forest in which they were made and the forest soil
on which they reposed have entirely disappeared? If there were woods and
forests On the heights, it would seem impossible that we should find,
as we do, Palæolithic implements lying in situ on the desert surface,
around the actual manufactories where they were made. Yet if the
constant rainfall and the vegetation of the Libyan desert area in
Palæolithic days is all a myth (as it most probably is), how came the
embedded palaeoliths, found by Gen. Pitt-Rivers, in the bed of diluvial
detritus which is apparently _débris_ from the plateau brought down by
the Palæolithic _wadi_ streams?

Water erosion has certainly formed the Theban _wadis_. But this water
erosion was probably not that which would be the result of perennial
streams flowing down from wooded heights, but of torrents like those
of to-day, which fill the _wadis_ once in three years or so after heavy
rain, but repeated at much closer intervals. We may in fact suppose
just so much difference in meteorological conditions as would make it
possible for sudden rain-storms to occur over the desert at far more
frequent intervals than at present. That would account for the detritus
bed at the mouth of the _wadi_, and its embedded flints, and at the
same time maintain the general probability of the idea that the desert
plateaus were desert in Palæolithic days as now, and that early man only
knapped his flints up there because he found the flint there. He himself
lived on the slopes and nearer the marsh.

This new view seems to be much sounder and more probable than the old
one, maintained by Flinders Petrie and Blanckenhorn, according to which
the high plateau was the home of man in Palæolithic times, when the
rainfall, as shown by the valley erosion and waterfalls, must have
caused an abundant vegetation on the plateau, where man could live and
hunt his game. [*Petrie, Nagada and Ballas, p. 49.] Were this so, it
is patent that the Palæolithic flints could not have been found on the
desert surface as they are. Mr. H. J. L. Beadnell, of the Geological
Survey of Egypt, to whom we are indebted for the promulgation of the
more modern and probable view, says: “Is it certain that the high
plateau was then clothed with forests? What evidence is there to show
that it differed in any important respect from its present aspect? And
if, as I suggest, desert conditions obtained then as now, and man merely
worked his flints along the edges of the plateaus overlooking the
Nile valley, I see no reason why flint implements, dating even from
Palæolithic times should not in favourable cases still be found in
the spots where they were left, surrounded by the flakes struck off in
manufacture. On the flat plateaus the occasional rains which fall--once
in three or four years--can effect but little transport of material, and
merely lower the general level by dissolving the underlying limestone,
so that the plateau surface is left with a coating of nodules and blocks
of insoluble flint and chert. Flint implements might thus be expected
to remain in many localities for indefinite periods, but they would
certainly become more or less ‘patinated,’ pitted on the surface, and
rounded at the angles after long exposure to heat, cold, and blown
sand.” This is exactly the case of the Palæolithic flint tools from the
desert plateau.

[Illustration: 012.jpg UPPER DESERT PLATEAU, WHERE PALEOLITHIC
IMPLEMENTS ARE FOUND, Thebes: 1,400 leet above the Nile.]

We do not know whether Palæolithic man in Egypt was contemporary with
the cave-man of Europe. We have no means of gauging the age of the
Palæolithic Egyptian weapons, as we have for the Neolithic period.
The historical (dynastic) period of Egyptian annals began with the
unification of the kingdom under one head somewhere about 4500 B.C. At
that time copper as well as stone weapons were used, so that we may say
that at the beginning of the historical age the Egyptians were living
in the “Chalcolithic” period. We can trace the use of copper back for
a considerable period anterior to the beginning of the Ist Dynasty,
so that we shall probably not be far wrong if we do not bring down the
close of the purely Neolithic Age in Egypt--the close of the Age of
Stone, properly so called--later than +5000 B.C. How far back in the
remote ages the transition period between the Palæolithic and Neolithic
Ages should be placed, it is utterly impossible to say. The use of stone
for weapons and implements continued in Egypt as late as the time of
the XIIth Dynasty, about 2500-2000 B.C. But these XIIth Dynasty stone
implements show by their forms how late they are in the history of the
Stone Age. The axe heads, for instance, are in form imitations of
the copper and bronze axe heads usual at that period; they are stone
imitations of metal, instead of the originals on whose model the metal
weapons were formed. The flint implements of the XIIth Dynasty were
a curious survival from long past ages. After the time of the XIIth
Dynasty stone was no longer used for tools or weapons, except for the
sacred rite of making the first incision in the dead bodies before
beginning the operations of embalming; for this purpose, as Herodotus
tells us, an “Ethiopian stone” was used. This was no doubt a knife of
flint or chert, like those of the Neolithic ancestors of the Egyptians,
and the continued use of a stone knife for this one purpose only is a
very interesting instance of a ceremonial survival. We may compare the
wigs of British judges.

[Illustration: 014.jpg FLINT KNIFE]

We have no specimen of a flint knife which can definitely be asserted to
have belonged to an embalmer, but of the archaistic flint weapons of the
XIIth Dynasty we have several specimens. They were found by Prof. Petrie
at the place named by him “Kahun,” the site of a XIIth Dynasty town
built near the pyramid of King Usertsen (or Senusret) II at Illahun,
at the mouth of the canal leading from the Nile valley into the
oasis-province of the Payyum. These Kahun flints, and others of probably
the same period found by Mr. Seton-Karr at the very ancient flint
works in the Wadi esh-Shêkh, are of very coarse and poor workmanship
as compared with the stone-knapping triumphs of the late Neolithic and
early Chalcolithic periods. The delicacy of the art had all been lost.
But the best flint knives of the early period--dating to just a little
before the time of the Ist Dynasty, when flint-working had attained its
apogee, and copper had just begun to be used--are undoubtedly the most
remarkable stone weapons ever made in the world. The grace and utility
of the form, the delicacy of the fluted chipping on the side, and
the minute care with which the tiny serrations of the cutting edge,
serrations so small that often they can hardly be seen with the naked
eye, are made, can certainly not be parallelled elsewhere. The art
of flint-knapping reached its zenith in Ancient Egypt. The specimen
illustrated has a handle covered with gold decorated with incised
designs representing animals.

The prehistoric Egyptians may also fairly be said to have attained
greater perfection than other peoples in the Neolithic stage of culture,
in other arts besides the making of stone tools and weapons. Their
pottery is of remarkable perfection. Now that the sites of the Egyptian
prehistoric settlements have been so thoroughly explored by competent
archæologists (and, unhappily, as thoroughly pillaged by incompetent
natives), this prehistoric Egyptian pottery has become extremely well
known. In fact, it is so common that good specimens may be bought
anywhere in Egypt for a few piastres. Most museums possess sets of this
pottery, of which great quantities have been brought back from Egypt
by Prof. Petrie and other explorers. It is of very great interest,
artistically as well as historically. The potter’s wheel was not yet
invented, and all the vases, even those of the most perfect shape, were
built up by hand. The perfection of form attained without the aid of the
wheel is truly marvellous.

The commonest type of this pottery is a red polished ware vase with
black top, due to its having been baked mouth downward in a fire, the
ashes of which, according to Prof. Petrie, deoxidized the hæmatite
burnishing, and so turned the red colour to black. “In good examples
the hæmatite has not only been reduced to black magnetic oxide, but
the black has the highest polish, as seen on fine Greek vases. This is
probably due to the formation of carbonyl gas in the smothered fire.
This gas acts as a solvent of magnetic oxide, and hence allows it to
assume a new surface, like the glassy surface of some marbles subjected
to solution in water.” This black and red ware appears to be the most
ancient prehistoric Egyptian pottery known. Later in date are a red
ware and a black ware with rude geometrical incised designs, imitating
basketwork, and with the incised lines filled in with white. Later again
is a buff ware, either plain or decorated with wavy lines, concentric
circles, and elaborate drawings of boats sailing on the Nile, ostriches,
fish, men and women, and so on.

[Illustration: 017.jpg (right) BUFF WARE VASE, Predynastic period,
before 4000 B.C.]

These designs are in deep red. With this elaborate pottery the Neolithic
ceramic art of Egypt reached its highest point; in the succeeding period
(the beginning of the historic age) there was a decline in workmanship,
exhibiting clumsy forms and bad colour, and it is not until the time of
the IVth Dynasty that good pottery (a fine polished red) is once more
found. Meanwhile the invention of glazed pottery, which was unknown to
the prehistoric Egyptians, had been made (before the beginning of the
Ist Dynasty). The unglazed ware of the first three dynasties was bad,
but the new invention of light blue glazed faience (not porcelain
properly so called) seems to have made great progress, and we possess
fine specimens at the beginning of the Ist Dynasty. The prehistoric
Egyptians were also proficient in other arts. They carved ivory and they
worked gold, which is known to have been almost the first metal worked
by man; certainly in Egypt it was utilized for ornament even before
copper was used for work. We may refer to the illustration of a flint
knife with gold handle, already given. [* See illustration.]

The date of the actual introduction of copper for tools and weapons into
Egypt is uncertain, but it seems probable that copper was occasionally
used at a very early period. Copper weapons have been found in
pre-dynastic graves beside the finest buff pottery with elaborate red
designs, so that we may say that when the flint-working and pottery of
the Neolithic Egyptians had reached its zenith, the use of copper was
already known, and copper weapons were occasionally employed. We can
thus speak of the “Chalcolithic” period in Egypt as having already begun
at that time, no doubt several centuries before the beginning of the
historical or dynastic age. Strictly speaking, the Egyptians remained
in the “Chalcolithic” period till the end of the XIIth Dynasty, but in
practice it is best to speak of this period, when the word is used, as
extending from the time of the finest flint weapons and pottery of the
prehistoric age (when the “Neolithic” period may be said to close) till
about the IId or IIId Dynasty. By that time the “Bronze,” or, rather,
“Copper,” Age of Egypt had well begun, and already stone was not in
common use.

The prehistoric pottery is of the greatest value to the archæologist,
for with its help some idea may be obtained of the succession of periods
within the late Neolithic-Chalcolithic Age. The enormous number of
prehistoric graves which have been examined enables us to make an
exhaustive comparison of the different kinds of pottery found in
them, so that we can arrange them in order according to pottery they
contained. By this means we obtain an idea of the development of
different types of pottery, and the sequence of the types. Thus it is
that we can say with some degree of confidence that the black and red
ware is the most ancient form, and that the buff with red designs is one
of the latest forms of prehistoric pottery. Other objects found in the
graves can be classified as they occur with different pottery types.

With the help of the pottery we can thus gain a more or less reliable
conspectus of the development of the late “Neolithic” culture of Egypt.
This system of “sequence-dating” was introduced by Prof. Petrie, and is
certainly very useful. It must not, however, be pressed too far or be
regarded as an iron-bound system, with which all subsequent discoveries
must be made to fit in by force. It is not to be supposed that all
prehistoric pottery developed its series of types in an absolutely
orderly manner without deviations or throws-back. The work of man’s
hands is variable and eccentric, and does not develop or evolve in an
undeviating course as the work of nature does. It is a mistake, very
often made by anthropologists and archæologists, who forget this
elementary fact, to assume “curves of development,” and so forth, or
semi-savage culture, on absolutely even and regular lines. Human culture
has not developed either evenly or regularly, as a matter of fact.
Therefore we cannot always be sure that, because the Egyptian black and
red pottery does not occur in graves with buff and red, it is for
this reason absolutely earlier in date than the latter. Some of the
development-sequences may in reality be contemporary with others instead
of earlier, and allowance must always be made for aberrations and
reversions to earlier types.

This caveat having been entered, however, we may provisionally
accept Prof. Petrie’s system of sequence-dating as giving the best
classification of the prehistoric antiquities according to development.
So it may fairly be said that, as far as we know, the black and red
pottery (“sequence-date 30--“) is the most ancient Neolithic Egyptian
ware known; that the buff and red did not begin to be used till about
“sequence-date 45;” that bone and ivory carvings were commonest in the
earlier period (“sequence-dates 30-50”); that copper was almost unknown
till “sequence-date 50,” and so on. The arbitrary numbers used range
from 30 to 80, in order to allow for possible earlier and later
additions, which may be rendered necessary by the progress of discovery.
The numbers are of course as purely arbitrary and relative as those
of the different thermometrical systems, but they afford a convenient
system of arrangement. The products of the prehistoric Egyptians are, so
to speak, distributed on a conventional plan over a scale numbered from
30 to 80, 30 representing the beginning and 80 the close of the term,
so far as its close has as yet been ascertained. It is probable that
“sequence-date 80” more or less accurately marks the beginning of the
dynastic or historical period.

This hypothetically chronological classification is, as has been said,
due to Prof. Petrie, and has been adopted by Mr. Randall-Maclver and
other students of prehistoric Egypt in their work. [*_El Amra and
Abydos_, Egypt Exploration Fund, 1902.] To Prof. Petrie then is due the
credit of systematizing the study of Egyptian prehistoric antiquities;
but the further credit of having _discovered_ these antiquities
themselves and settled their date belongs not to him but to the
distinguished French archæologist, M. J. de Morgan, who was for several
years director of the museum at Giza, and is now chief of the French
archæological delegation in Persia, which has made of late years so many
important discoveries. The proof of the prehistoric date of this class
of antiquities was given, not by Prof. Petrie after his excavations at
Dendera in 1897-8, but by M. de Morgan in his volume, _Recherches sur
les Origines de l’Égypte: l’Âge de la Pierre et les Métaux_, published
in 1895-6. In this book the true chronological position of the
prehistoric antiquities was pointed out, and the existence of an
Egyptian Stone Age finally decided. M. de Morgan’s work was based on
careful study of the results of excavations carried on for several years
by the Egyptian government in various parts of Egypt, in the course
of which a large number of cemeteries of the primitive type had been
discovered. It was soon evident to M. de Morgan that these primitive
graves, with their unusual pottery and flint implements, could be
nothing less than the tombs of the prehistoric Egyptians, the Egyptians
of the Stone Age.

Objects of the prehistoric period had been known to the museums for many
years previously, but owing to the uncertainty of their provenance and
the absence of knowledge of the existence of the primitive cemeteries,
no scientific conclusions had been arrived at with regard to them; and
it was not till the publication of M. de Morgan’s book that they were
recognized and classified as prehistoric. The necropoles investigated
by M. de Morgan and his assistants extended from Kawâmil in the north,
about twenty miles north of Abydos, to Edfu in the south. The chief
cemeteries between these two points were those of Bât Allam, Saghel
el-Baglieh, el-’Amra, Nakâda, Tûkh, and Gebelên. All the burials were
of simple type, analogous to those of the Neolithic races in the rest
of the world. In a shallow, oval grave, excavated often but a few inches
below the surface of the soil, lay the body, cramped up with the knees
to the chin, sometimes in a rough box of pottery, more often with only
a mat to cover it. Ready to the hand of the dead man were his flint
weapons and tools, and the usual red and black, or buff and red, pots
lay beside him; originally, no doubt, they had been filled with the
funeral meats, to sustain the ghost in the next world. Occasionally a
simple copper weapon was found. With the body were also buried slate
palettes for grinding the green eye-paint which the Egyptians loved even
at this early period. These are often carved to suggest the forms of
animals, such as birds, bats, tortoises, goats, etc.; on others are
fantastic creatures with two heads. Combs of bone, too, are found,
ornamented in a similar way with birds’ or goats’ heads, often double.
And most interesting of all are the small bone and ivory figures of men
and women which are also found. These usually have little blue beads for
eyes, and are of the quaintest and naivest appearance conceivable. Here
we have an elderly man with a long pointed beard, there two women with
inane smiles upon their countenances, here another woman, of better work
this time, with a child slung across her shoulder. This figure, which
is in the British Museum, must be very late, as prehistoric Egyptian
antiquities go. It is almost as good in style as the early Ist Dynasty
objects. Such were the objects which the simple piety of the early
Egyptian prompted him to bury with the bodies of his dead, in order that
they might find solace and contentment in the other world.

All the prehistoric cemeteries are of this type, with the graves pressed
closely together, so that they often impinge upon one another. The
nearness of the graves to the surface is due to the exposed positions,
at the entrances to _wadis_, in which the primitive cemeteries are
usually found. The result is that they are always swept by the winds,
which prevent the desert sand from accumulating over them, and so have
preserved the original level of the ground. From their proximity to
the surface they are often found disturbed, more often by the agency of
jackals than that of man.

Contemporaneously with M. de Morgan’s explorations, Prof. Flinders
Petrie and Mr. J. Quibell had, in the winter of 1894-5, excavated in
the districts of Tukh and Nakada, on the west bank of the Nile opposite
Koptos, a series of extensive cemeteries of the primitive type, from
which they obtained a large number of antiquities, published in their
volume Nagada and Dallas. The plates giving representations of the
antiquities found were of the highest interest, but the scientific value
of the letter-press is vitiated by the fact that the true historical
position of the antiquities was not perceived by their discoverers, who
came to the conclusion that these remains were those of a “New Pace” of
Libyan invaders. This race, they supposed, had entered Egypt after the
close of the flourishing period of the “Old Kingdom” at the end of the
VIth Dynasty, and had occupied part of the Nile valley from that time
till the period of the Xth Dynasty.

This conclusion was proved erroneous by M. de Morgan almost as soon
as made, and the French archæologist’s identification of the primitive
remains as pre-dynastic was at once generally accepted. It was obvious
that a hypothesis of the settlement of a stone-using barbaric race in
the midst of Egypt at so late a date as the period immediately preceding
the XIIth Dynasty, a race which mixed in no way with the native
Egyptians themselves, and left no trace of their influence upon the
later Egyptians, was one which demanded greater faith than the simple
explanation of M. de Morgan.

The error of the British explorers was at once admitted by Mr. Quibell,
in his volume on the excavations of 1897 at el-Kab, published in 1898.*
Mr. Quibell at once found full and adequate confirmation of M. de
Morgan’s discovery in his diggings at el-Kab. Prof. Petrie admitted
the correctness of M. de Morgan’s views in the preface to his volume
Diospolis Parva, published three years later in 1901.** The preface to
the first volume of M. de Morgan’s book contained a generous recognition
of the method and general accuracy of Prof. Petrie’s excavations, which
contrasted favourably, according to M. de Morgan, with the excavations
of others, generally carried on without scientific control, and with
the sole aim of obtaining antiquities or literary texts.*** That M. de
Morgan’s own work was carried out as scientifically and as carefully
is evident from the fact that his conclusions as to the chronological
position of the prehistoric antiquities have been shown to be correct.
To describe M. de Morgan’s discovery as a “happy guess,” as has been
done, is therefore beside the mark.

     * El-Kab. Egyptian Research Account, 1897, p. 11.

     ** Diospolis Parva. Egypt Exploration Fund, 1901, p. 2.

     *** Recherches: Age de la Pierre, p. xiii.

Another most important British excavation was that carried on by
Messrs. Randall-Maclver and Wilkin at el-’Amra. The imposing lion-headed
promontory of el-’Amra stands out into the plain on the west bank of the
Nile about five miles south of Abydos. At the foot of this hill M. de
Morgan found a very extensive prehistoric necropolis, which he examined,
but did not excavate to any great extent, and the work of thoroughly
excavating it was performed by Messrs. Randall-MacIver and Wilkin for
the Egypt Exploration Fund. The results have thrown very great light
upon the prehistoric culture of Egypt, and burials of all prehistoric
types, some of them previously unobserved, were found. Among the most
interesting are burials in pots, which have also been found by Mr.
Garstang in a predynastic necropolis at Ragagna, north of Abydos. One
of the more remarkable observations made at el-’Amra was the progressive
development of the tombs from the simplest pot-burial to a small brick
chamber, the embryo of the brick tombs of the Ist Dynasty. Among the
objects recovered from this site may be mentioned a pottery model of
oxen, a box in the shape of a model hut, and a slate “palette” with what
is perhaps the oldest Egyptian hieroglyph known, a representation of the
fetish-sign of the god Min, in relief. All these are preserved in the
British Museum. The skulls of the bodies found were carefully preserved
for craniometric examination.

In 1901 an extensive prehistoric cemetery was being excavated by Messrs.
Reisner and Lythgoe at Nag’ed-Dêr, opposite Girga, and at el-Ahaiwa,
further north, another prehistoric necropolis has been excavated by
these gentlemen, working for the University of California.

[Illustration: 027.jpg CAMP OF THE EXPEDITION OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA AT NAG’ ED-DÊR, 1901.]

The cemetery of Nag’ed-Dêr is of the usual prehistoric type, with its
multitudes of small oval graves, excavated just a little way below the
surface. Graves of this kind are the most primitive of all. Those at
el-’Amra are usually more developed, often, as has been noted, rising to
the height of regular brick tombs. They are evidently later, nearer to
the time of the Ist Dynasty. The position of the Nag’ed-Dêr cemetery is
also characteristic. It lies on the usual low ridge at the entrance to a
desert _wadi_, which is itself one of the most picturesque in this
part of Egypt, with its chaos of great boulders and fallen rocks. An
illustration of the camp of Mr. Reisner’s expedition at Nag’ed-Dêr is
given above. The excavations of the University of California are carried
out with the greatest possible care and are financed with the greatest
possible liberality. Mr. Reisner has therefore been able to keep an
absolutely complete photographic record of everything, even down to
the successive stages in the opening of a tomb, which will be of the
greatest use to science when published.

For a detailed study of the antiquities of the prehistoric period the
publications of Prof. Petrie, Mr. Quibell, and Mr. Randall-Maclver are
more useful than that of M. de Morgan, who does not give enough details.
Every atom of evidence is given in the publications of the British
explorers, whereas it is a characteristic of French work to give
brilliant conclusions, beautifully illustrated, without much of the
evidence on which the conclusions are based. This kind of work does not
appeal to the Anglo-Saxon mind, which takes nothing on trust, even
from the most renowned experts, and always wants to know the why and
wherefore. The complete publication of evidence which marks the British
work will no doubt be met with, if possible in even more complete
detail, in the American work of Messrs. Reisner, Lythgoe, and Mace (the
last-named is an Englishman) for the University of California, when
published. The question of speedy versus delayed publication is a very
vexing one. Prof. Petrie prefers to publish as speedily as possible; six
months after the season’s work in Egypt is done, the full publication
with photographs of everything appears. Mr. Reisner and the French
explorers prefer to publish nothing until they have exhaustively studied
the whole of the evidence, and can extract nothing more from it. This
would be admirable if the French published their discoveries fully, but
they do not. Even M. de Morgan has not approached the fulness of
detail which characterizes British work and which will characterize Mr.
Reisner’s publication when it appears. The only drawback to this method
is that general interest in the particular excavations described tends
to pass away before the full description appears.

Prof. Petrie has explored other prehistoric sites at Abadiya, and Mr.
Quibell at el-Kab. M. de Morgan and his assistants have examined a large
number of sites, ranging from the Delta to el-Kab. Further research has
shown that some of the sites identified by M. de Morgan as prehistoric
are in reality of much later date, for example, Kahun, where the late
flints of XIIth Dynasty date were found. He notes that “large numbers
of Neolithic flint weapons are found in the desert on the borders of
the Fayyum, and at Helwan, south of Cairo,” and that all the important
necropoles and kitchen-middens of the predynastic people are to be found
in the districts of Abydos and Thebes, from el-Kawamil in the North to
el-Kab in the South. It is of course too soon to assert with confidence
that there are no prehistoric remains in any other part of Egypt,
especially in the long tract between the Fayyûm and the district of
Abydos, but up to the present time none have been found in this region.

This geographical distribution of the prehistoric remains fits in
curiously with the ancient legend concerning the origin of the ancestors
of the Egyptians in Upper Egypt, and supports the much discussed theory
that they came originally to the Nile valley from the shores of the Red
Sea by way of the Wadi Hammamat, which debouches on to the Nile in the
vicinity of Koptos and Kus, opposite Ballas and Tûkh. The supposition
seems a very probable one, and it may well be that the earliest
Egyptians entered the valley of the Nile by the route suggested and
then spread northwards and southwards in the valley. The fact that their
remains are not found north of el-Kawâmil nor south of el-Kab might
perhaps be explained by the supposition that, when they had extended
thus far north and south from their original place of arrival, they
passed from the primitive Neolithic condition to the more highly
developed copper-using culture of the period which immediately preceded
the establishment of the monarchy. The Neolithic weapons of the Fayyûm
and Hel-wân would then be the remains of a different people, which
inhabited the Delta and Middle Egypt in very early times. This people
may have been of Mediterranean stock, akin to the primitive inhabitants
of Palestine, Greece, Italy, and Spain; and they no doubt were identical
with the inhabitants of Lower Egypt who were overthrown and conquered by
Kha-sekhem and the other Southern founders of the monarchy (who belonged
to the race which had come from the Red Sea by the Wadi Hammamat), and
so were the ancestors of the later natives of Lower Egypt. Whether the
Southerners, whose primitive remains we find from el-Kawâmil to el-Kab,
were of the same race as the Northerners whom they conquered, cannot
be decided. The skull-form of the Southerners agrees with that of the
Mediterranean races. But we have no nécropoles of the Northerners to
tell us much of their peculiarities. We have nothing but their flint
arrowheads.

But it should be observed that, in spite of the present absence of all
primitive remains (whether mere flints, or actual graves with bodies and
relics) of the primeval population between the Fayyûm and el-Kawâmil,
there is no proof that the primitive race of Upper Egypt was not
coterminous and identical with that of the lower country. It
might therefore be urged that the whole Neolithic population was
“Mediterranean” by its skull-form and body-structure, and specifically
“Nilotic” (indigenous Egyptian) in its culture-type. This is quite
possible, but we have again to account for the legends of distant origin
on the Red Sea coast, the probability that one element of the Egyptian
population was of extraneous origin and came from the east into the Nile
valley near Koptos, and finally the historical fact of an advance of the
early dynastic Egyptians from the South to the conquest of the North.
The latter fact might of course be explained as a civil war analogous
to that between Thebes and Asyût in the time of the IXth Dynasty, but
against this explanation is to be set the fact that the contemporary
monuments of the Southerners exhibit the men of the North as of foreign
and non-Egyptian ethnic type, resembling Libyans. It is possible that
they were akin to the Libyans; and this would square very well with the
first theory, but it may also be made to fit in with a development of
the second, which has been generally accepted.

According to this view, the whole primitive Neolithic population of
North and South was Miotic, indigenous in origin, and akin to the
“Mediterraneans “of Prof. Sergi and the other ethnologists. It was not
this population, the stone-users whose nécropoles have been found by
Messrs. de Morgan, Pétrie, and Maclver, that entered the Nile valley by
the Wadi Hammamat. This was another race of different ethnic origin,
which came from the Red Sea toward the end of the Neolithic period,
and, being of higher civilization than the native Nilotes, assumed the
lordship over them, gave a great impetus to the development of their
culture, and started at once the institution of monarchy, the knowledge
of letters, and the use of metals. The chiefs of this superior tribe
founded the monarchy, conquered the North, unified the kingdom, and
began Egyptian history. From many indications it would seem probable
that these conquerors were of Babylonian origin, or that the culture
they brought with them (possibly from Arabia) was ultimately of
Babylonian origin. They themselves would seem to have been Semites,
or rather proto-Semites, who came from Arabia to Africa by way of
the straits of Bab el-Mandeb, and proceeded up the coast to about the
neighbourhood of Kusêr, whence the Wadi Hammamat offered them an open
road to the valley of the Nile. By this route they may have entered
Egypt, bringing with them a civilization, which, like that of the other
Semites, had been profoundly influenced and modified by that of the
Sumerian inhabitants of Babylonia. This Semitic-Sumerian culture,
mingling with that of the Nilotes themselves, produced the civilization
of Ancient Egypt as we know it.

This is a very plausible hypothesis, and has a great deal of evidence in
its favour. It seems certain that in the early dynastic period two
races lived in Egypt, which differed considerably in type, and also,
apparently, in burial customs. The later Egyptians always buried the
dead lying on their backs, extended at full length. During the period of
the Middle Kingdom (XIth-XIIIth Dynasties) the head was usually turned
over on to the left side, in order that the dead man might look through
the two great eyes painted on that side of the coffin. Afterward the
rigidly extended position was always adopted. The Neolithic Egyptians,
however, buried the dead lying wholly on the left side and in a
contracted position, with the knees drawn up to the chin. The bodies
were not embalmed, and the extended position and mummification were
never used. Under the IVth Dynasty we find in the necropolis of Mêdûm
(north of the Payyûm) the two positions used simultaneously, and the
extended bodies are mummified. The contracted bodies are skeletons, as
in the case of most of the predynastic bodies. When these are found with
flesh, skin, and hair intact, their preservation is due to the dryness
of the soil and the preservative salts it contains, not to intentional
embalming, which was evidently introduced by those who employed the
extended position in burial. The contracted position is found as late as
the Vth Dynasty at Dashasha, south of the Eayyûm, but after that date it
is no longer found.

The conclusion is obvious that the contracted position without
mummification, which the Neolithic people used, was supplanted in the
early dynastic period by the extended position with mummification, and
by the time of the VIth Dynasty it was entirely superseded. This points
to the supersession of the burial customs of the indigenous Neolithic
race by those of another race which conquered and dominated the
indigenes. And, since the extended burials of the IVth Dynasty are
evidently those of the higher nobles, while the contracted ones are
those of inferior people, it is probable that the customs of extended
burial and embalming were introduced by a foreign race which founded the
Egyptian monarchical state, with its hierarchy of nobles and officials,
and in fact started Egyptian civilization on its way. The conquerors of
the North were thus not the descendants of the Neolithic people of the
South, but their conquerors; in fact, they dominated the indigenes both
of North and South, who will then appear (since we find the custom of
contracted burial in the North at Dashasha and Mêdûm) to have originally
belonged to the same race.

The conquering race is that which is supposed to have been of Semitic or
proto-Semitic origin, and to have brought elements of Sumerian culture
to savage Egypt. The reasons advanced for this supposition are the
following:--

(1) Just as the Egyptian race was evidently compounded of two elements,
of conquered “Mediterraneans” and conquering x, so the Egyptian language
is evidently compounded of two elements, the one Nilotic, perhaps
related in some degree to the Berber dialects of North Africa, the other
not x, but evidently Semitic.

(2) Certain elements of the early dynastic civilization, which do not
appear in that of the earlier pre-dynastic period, resemble well-known
elements of the civilization of Babylonia. We may instance the use of
the cylinder-seal, which died out in Egypt in the time of the XVIIIth
Dynasty, but was always used in Babylonia from the earliest to the
latest times. The early Egyptian mace-head is of exactly the same
type as the early Babylonian one. In the British Museum is an Egyptian
mace-head of red breccia, which is identical in shape and size with
one from Babylonia (also in the museum) bearing the name of
Shargani-shar-ali (i.e. Sargon, King of Agade), one of the earliest
Chaldæan monarchs, who must have lived about the same time as the
Egyptian kings of the IId-IIId Dynasties, to which period the Egyptian
mace-head may also be approximately assigned. The Egyptian art of the
earliest dynasties bears again a remarkable resemblance to that of early
Babylonia. It is not till the time of the IId Dynasty that Egyptian art
begins to take upon itself the regular form which we know so well, and
not till that of the IVth that this form was finally crystallized. Under
the 1st Dynasty we find the figure of man or, to take other instances,
that of a lion, or a hawk, or a snake, often treated in a style very
different from that in which we are accustomed to see a man, a lion, a
hawk, or a snake depicted in works of the later period. And the striking
thing is that these early representations, which differ so much from
what we find in later Egyptian art, curiously resemble the works of
early Babylonian art, of the time of the patesis of Shirpurla or the
Kings Shargani-shar-ali and Narâm-Sin. One of the best known relics
of the early art of Babylonia is the famous “Stele of Vultures” now in
Paris. On this we see the enemies of Eannadu, one of the early rulers
of Shirpurla, cast out to be devoured by the vultures. On an Egyptian
relief of slate, evidently originally dedicated in a temple record of
some historical event, and dating from the beginning of the Ist Dynasty
(practically contemporary, according to our latest knowledge, with
Eannadu), we have an almost exactly similar scene of captives being cast
out into the desert, and devoured by lions and vultures. The two reliefs
are curiously alike in their clumsy, naïve style of art. A further
point is that the official represented on the stele, who appears to be
thrusting one of the bound captives out to die, wears a long fringed
garment of Babylonish cut, quite different from the clothes of the later
Egyptians.

(3) There are evidently two distinct and different main strata in the
fabric of Egyptian religion. On the one hand we find a mass of myth and
religious belief of very primitive, almost savage, cast, combining
a worship of the actual dead in their tombs--which were supposed
to communicate and thus form a veritable “underworld,” or, rather,
“under-Egypt”--with veneration of magic animals, such as jackals, cats,
hawks, and crocodiles. On the other hand, we have a sun and sky worship
of a more elevated nature, which does not seem to have amalgamated with
the earlier fetishism and corpse-worship until a comparatively late
period. The main seats of the sun-worship were at Heliopolis in the
Delta and at Edfu in Upper Egypt. Heliopolis seems always to have been
a centre of light and leading in Egypt, and it is, as is well known,
the On of the Bible, at whose university the Jewish lawgiver Moses is
related to have been educated “in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.” The
philosophical theories of the priests of the Sun-gods, Râ-Harmachis and
Turn, at Heliopolis seem to have been the source from which sprang the
monotheistic heresy of the Disk-Worshippers (in the time of the XVIIIth
Dynasty), who, under the guidance of the reforming King Akhunaten,
worshipped only the disk of the sun as the source of all life, the door
in heaven, so to speak, through which the hidden One Deity poured
forth heat and light, the origin of life upon the earth. Very early
in Egyptian history the Heliopolitans gained the upper hand, and the
Râ-worship (under the Vth Dynasty, the apogee of the Old Kingdom) came
to the front, and for the first time the kings took the afterwards
time-honoured royal title of “Son of the Sun.” It appears then as a
more or less foreign importation into the Nile valley, and bears most
undoubtedly a Semitic impress. Its two chief seats were situated, the
one, Heliopolis, in the North on the eastern edge of the Delta,--just
where an early Semitic settlement from over the desert might be expected
to be found,--the other, Edfu, in the Upper Egyptian territory south
of the Thebaïd, Koptos, and the Wadi Ham-mamat, and close to the chief
settlement of the earliest kings and the most ancient capital of Upper
Egypt.

(4) The custom of burying at full length was evidently introduced into
Egypt by the second, or x race. The Neolithic Egyptians buried in the
cramped position. The early Babylonians buried at full length, as far
as we know. On the same “Stele of Vultures,” which has already been
mentioned, we see the burying at full length of dead warriors. [* See
illustration.] There is no trace of any _early_ burial in Babylonia in
the cramped position. The tombs at Warka (Erech) with cramped bodies
in pottery coffins are of very late date. A further point arises with
regard to embalming. The Neolithic Egyptians did not embalm the dead.
Usually their cramped bodies are found as skeletons. When they are
mummified, it is merely owing to the preservative action of the salt
in the soil, not to any process of embalming. The second, or x race,
however, evidently introduced the custom of embalming as well as that
of burial at full length and the use of coffins. The Neolithic Egyptian
used no box or coffin, the nearest approach to this being a pot, which
was inverted over the coiled up body. Usually only a mat was put over
the body.

[Illustration: 038.jpg Portion of the “Stele of Vultures” Found at
Telloh]

[Illustration: 038-text.jpg]

Now it is evident that Babylonians and Assyrians, who buried the dead at
full length in chests, had some knowledge of embalming. An Assyrian king
tells us how he buried his royal father:--

     “Within the grave, the secret place,
     In kingly oil, I gently laid him.
     The grave-stone marketh his resting-place.
     With mighty bronze I sealed its entrance,
     And I protected it with an incantation.”

The “kingly oil” was evidently used with the idea of preserving the body
from decay. Salt also was used to preserve the dead, and Herodotus
says that the Babylonians buried in honey, which was also used by the
Egyptians. No doubt the Babylonian method was less perfect than the
Egyptian, but the comparison is an interesting one, when taken in
connection with the other points of resemblance mentioned above.

We find, then, that an analysis of the Egyptian language reveals a
Semitic element in it; that the early dynastic culture had certain
characteristics which were unknown to the Neolithic Egyptians but are
closely parallelled in early Babylonia; that there were two elements in
the Egyptian religion, one of which seems to have originally belonged to
the Neolithic people, while the other has a Semitic appearance; and that
there were two sets of burial customs in early Egypt, one, that of the
Neolithic people, the other evidently that of a conquering race, which
eventually prevailed over the former; these later rites were analogous
to those of the Babylonians and Assyrians, though differing from them
in points of detail. The conclusion is that the x or conquering race
was Semitic and brought to Egypt the Semitic elements in the Egyptian
religion and a culture originally derived from that of the Sumerian
inhabitants of Babylonia, the non-Semitic parent of all Semitic
civilizations.

The question now arises, how did this Semitic people reach Egypt? We
have the choice of two points of entry: First, Heliopolis in the North,
where the Semitic sun-worship took root, and, second, the Wadi Hamma-mat
in the South, north of Edfu, the southern centre of sun-worship, and
Hierakonpolis (Nekheb-Nekhen), the capital of the Upper Egyptian kingdom
which existed before the foundation of the monarchy. The legends which
seem to bring the ancestors of the Egyptians from the Red Sea coast have
already been mentioned. They are closely connected with the worship
of the Sky and Sun god Horus of Edfu. Hathor, his nurse, the “House of
Horus,” the centre of whose worship was at Dendera, immediately opposite
the mouth of the Wadi Hammamat, was said to have come from Ta-neter,
“The Holy Land,” i.e. Abyssinia or the Red Sea coast, with the company
or _paut_ of the gods. Now the Egyptians always seem to have had some
idea that they were connected racially with the inhabitants of the Land
of Punt or Puenet, the modern Abyssinia and Somaliland. In the time of
the XVIIIth Dynasty they depicted the inhabitants of Punt as greatly
resembling themselves in form, feature, and dress, and as wearing the
little turned-up beard which was worn by the Egyptians of the earliest
times, but even as early as the IVth Dynasty was reserved for the
gods. Further, the word _Punt_ is always written without the hieroglyph
determinative of a foreign country, thus showing that the Egyptians did
not regard the Punites as foreigners. This certainly looks as if the
Punites were a portion of the great migration from Arabia, left behind
on the African shore when the rest of the wandering people pressed on
northwards to the Wadi Hammamat and the Nile. It may be that the modern
Gallas and Abyssinians are descendants of these Punites.

Now the Sky-god of Edfu is in legend a conquering hero who advances down
the Nile valley, with his _Mesniu_, or “Smiths,” to overthrow the people
of the North, whom he defeats in a great battle near Dendera. This may
be a reminiscence of the first fights of the invaders with the Neolithic
inhabitants. The other form of Horus, “Horus, son of Isis,” has also a
body of retainers, the _Shemsu-Heru_, or “Followers of Horns,” who are
spoken of in late texts as the rulers of Egypt before the monarchy. They
evidently correspond to the dynasties of _Manes_,

[Illustration: 041greek.jpg]

or “Ghosts,” of Manetho, and are probably intended for the early kings
of Hierakonpolis.

The mention of the Followers of Horus as “Smiths” is very interesting,
for it would appear to show that the Semitic conquerors were notable
as metal-users, that, in fact, their conquest was that old story in the
dawn of the world’s history, the utter overthrow and subjection of the
stone-users by the metal-users, the primeval tragedy of the supersession
of flint by copper. This may be, but if the “Smiths” were the Semitic
conquerors who founded the kingdom, it would appear that the use of
copper was known in Egypt to some extent before their arrival, for we
find it in the graves of the late Neolithic Egyptians, very sparsely
from “sequence-date 30” to “45,” but afterwards more commonly. It was
evidently becoming known. The supposition, however, that the “Smiths”
 were the Semitic conquerors, and that they won their way by the aid of
their superior weapons of metal, may be provisionally accepted.

In favour of the view which would bring the conquerors by way of the
Wadi Hammamat, an interesting discovery may be quoted. Immediately
opposite Den-dera, where, according to the legend, the battle between
the _Mesniu_ and the aborigines took place, lies Koptos, at the mouth of
the Wadi Hammamat. Here, in 1894, underneath the pavement of the ancient
temple, Prof. Petrie found remains which he then diagnosed as belonging
to the most ancient epoch of Egyptian history. Among them were some
extremely archaic statues of the god Min, on which were curious
scratched drawings of bears, _crioceras-shells_, elephants walking over
hills, etc., of the most primitive description. With them were lions’
heads and birds of a style then unknown, but which we now know to belong
to the period of the beginning of the Ist Dynasty. But the statues of
Min are older. The _crioceras-shells_ belong to the Red Sea. Are we to
see in these statues the holy images of the conquerors from the Red Sea
who reached the Nile valley by way of the Wadi Hammamat, and set up the
first memorials of their presence at Koptos? It may be so, or the Min
statues may be older than the conquerors, and belong to the Neolithic
race, since Min and his fetish (which we find on the slate palette from
el-’Amra, already mentioned) seem to belong to the indigenous Nilotes.
In any case we have in these statues, two of which are in the Ashmolean
Museum at Oxford, probably the most ancient cult-images in the world:

This theory, which would make all the Neolithic inhabitants of Egypt
one people, who were conquered by a Semitic race, bringing a culture of
Sumerian origin to Egypt by way of the Wadi Hammamat, is that generally
accepted at the present time. It may, however, eventually prove
necessary to modify it. For reasons given above, it may well be that the
Neolithic population was itself not indigenous, and that it reached the
Nile valley by way of the Wadi Hammamat, spreading north and south
from the mouth of the _wadi_. It may also be considered probable that
a Semitic wave invaded Egypt by way of the Isthmus of Suez, where
the early sun-cultus of Heliopolis probably marks a primeval Semitic
settlement. In that case it would seem that the _Mesniu_ or “Smiths,”
 who introduced the use of metal, would have to be referred to the
originally Neolithic pre-Semitic people, who certainly were acquainted
with the use of copper, though not to any great extent. But this is not
a necessary supposition. The _Mesniu_ are closely connected with the
Sky-god Horus, who was possibly of Semitic origin, and another Semitic
wave, quite distinct from that which entered Egypt by way of the
Isthmus, may very well also have reached Egypt by the Wadi Hammamat, or,
equally possibly, from the far south, coming down to the Nile from the
Abyssinian mountains. The legend of the coming of Hathor from Ta-neter
may refer to some such wandering, and we know that the Egyptians of the
Old Kingdom communicated with the Land of Punt, not by way of the Red
Sea coast as Hatshepsut did, but by way of the Upper Nile. This would
tally well with the march of the _Mesniu_ northwards from Edfu to their
battle with the forces of Set at Dendera.

In any case, at the dawn of connected Egyptian history, we find two main
centres of civilization in Egypt, Heliopolis and Buto in the Delta
in the North, and Edfu and Hierakonpolis in the South. Here were
established at the beginning of the Chalcolithic stage of culture, we
may say, two kingdoms, of Lower and Upper Egypt, which were eventually
united by the superior arms of the kings of Upper Egypt, who imposed
their rule upon the North but at the same time removed their capital
thither. The dualism of Buto and Hierakonpolis really lasted throughout
Egyptian history. The king was always called “Lord of the Two Lands,”
 and wore the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt; the snakes of Buto and
Nekhebet (the goddess of Nekheb, opposite Nekhen or Hierakonpolis)
always typified the united kingdom. This dualism of course often led to
actual division and reversion to the predynastic order of things, as,
for instance, in the time of the XXIst Dynasty.

It might well seem that both the impulses to culture development in the
North and South came from Semitic inspiration, and that it was to
the Semitic invaders in North and South that the founding of the two
kingdoms was due. This may be true to some extent, but it is at the same
time very probable that the first development of political culture at
Hierakonpolis was really of pre-Semitic origin. The kingdom of Buto,
since its capital is situated so near to the seacoast, may have owed
its origin to oversea Mediterranean connections. There is much in
the political constitution of later Egypt which seems to have been of
indigenous and pre-Semitic origin. Especially does this seem to be so in
the case of the division and organization of the country into nomes. It
is obvious that so soon as agriculture began to be practised on a large
scale, boundaries would be formed, and in the unique conditions of
Egypt, where all boundaries disappear beneath the inundation every
year, it is evident that the fixing of division-lines as permanently as
possible by means of landmarks was early essayed. We can therefore with
confidence assign the formation of the nomes to very early times. Now
the names of the nomes and the symbols or emblems by which they were
distinguished are of very great interest in this connection. They are
nearly all figures of the magic animals of the primitive religion, and
fetish-emblems of the older deities. The names are, in fact, those of
the territories of the Neolithic Egyptian tribes, and their emblems are
those of the protecting tribal demons. The political divisions of the
country seem, then, to be of extremely ancient origin, and if the nomes
go back to a time before the Semitic invasions, so may also the kingdoms
of the South and North.

Of these predynastic kingdoms we know very little, except from legendary
sources. The Northerners who were conquered by Aha, Narmer, and
Khâsekhehiui do not look very much like Egyptians, but rather resemble
Semites or Libyans. On the “Stele of Palermo,” a chronicle of early
kings inscribed in the period of the Vth Dynasty, we have a list of
early kings of the North,--Seka, Desau, Tiu, Tesh, Nihab, Uatjântj,
Mekhe. The names are primitive in form. We know nothing more about them.
Last year Mr. C. T. Currelly attempted to excavate at Buto, in order to
find traces of the predynastic kingdom, but owing to the infiltration of
water his efforts were unsuccessful. It is improbable that anything is
now left of the most ancient period at that site, as the conditions in
the Delta are so very different from those obtaining in Upper Egypt.
There, at Hierakonpolis, and at el-Kab on the opposite bank of the Nile,
the sites of the ancient cities Nekhen and Nekheb, the excavators have
been very successful. The work was carried out by Messrs. Quibell and
Green, in the years 1891-9. Prehistoric burials were found on the hills
near by, but the larger portion of the antiquities were recovered from
the temple-ruins, and date back to the beginning of the 1st Dynasty,
exactly the time when the kings of Hierakonpolis first conquered the
kingdom of Buto and founded the united Egyptian monarchy.

The ancient temple, which was probably one of the earliest seats of
Egyptian civilization, was situated on a mound, now known as _el-Kom
el-ahmar_, “the Red Hill,” from its colour. The chief feature of the
most ancient temple seems to have been a circular mound, revetted by a
wall of sandstone blocks, which was apparently erected about the end of
the predynastic period. Upon this a shrine was probably erected. This
was the ancient shrine of Nekhen, the cradle of the Egyptian monarchy.
Close by it were found some of the most valuable relics of the earliest
Pharaonic age, the great ceremonial mace-heads and vases of Narmer and
“the Scorpion,” the shields or “palettes” of the same Narmer, the vases
and stelas of Khâsekhemui, and, of later date, the splendid copper
colossal group of King Pepi I and his son, which is now at Cairo. Most
of the 1st Dynasty objects are preserved in the Ashmo-lean Museum at
Oxford, which is one of the best centres for the study of early Egyptian
antiquities. Narmer and Khâsekhemui are, as we shall see, two of the
first monarchs of all Egypt. These sculptured and inscribed mace-heads,
shields, etc., are monuments dedicated by them in the ancestral shrine
at Hierakonpolis as records of their deeds. Both kings seem to have
waged war against the Northerners, the _Anu_ of Heliopolis and the
Delta, and on these votive monuments from Hierakonpolis we find
hieroglyphed records of the defeat of the _Anu_, who have very
definitely Semitic physiognomies.

On one shield or palette we see Narmer clubbing a man of Semitic
appearance, who is called the “Only One of the Marsh” (Delta), while
below two other Semites fly, seeking “fortress-protection.” Above is a
figure of a hawk, symbolizing the Upper Egyptian king, holding a rope
which is passed through the nose of a Semitic head, while behind is a
sign which may be read as “the North,” so that the whole symbolizes the
leading away of the North into captivity by the king of the South. It
is significant, in view of what has been said above with regard to the
probable Semitic origin of the Heliopolitan Northerners, to find the
people typical of the North-land represented by the Southerners as
Semites. Equally Semitic is the overthrown Northerner on the other
side of this well-known monument which we are describing; he is being
trampled under the hoofs and gored by the horns of a bull, who, like the
hawk, symbolizes the king. The royal bull has broken down the wall of a
fortified enclosure, in which is the hut or tent of the Semite, and the
bricks lie about promiscuously.

In connection with the Semitic origin of the Northerners, the form of
the fortified enclosures on both sides of this monument (that to whose
protection the two Semites on one side fly, and that out of which the
kingly bull has dragged the chief on the other) is noticeable. As usual
in Egyptian writing, the hieroglyph of these buildings takes the form of
a plan. The plan shows a crenelated enclosure, resembling the walls of
a great Babylonian palace or temple, such as have been found at Telloh,
Warka, or Mukayyar. The same design is found in Egypt at the Shuret
ez-Zebib, an Old Kingdom fortress at Abydos, in the tomb of King Aha at
Nakâda, and in many walls of mastaba-tombs of the early time. This is
another argument in favour of an early connection between Egypt and
Babylonia. We illustrate a fragment of another votive shield or palette
of the same kind, now in the museum of the Louvre, which probably came
originally from Hierakonpolis. It is of exactly similar workmanship to
that of Narmer, and is no doubt a fragment of another monument of that
king. On it we see the same subject of the overthrowing of a Northerner
(of Semitic aspect) by the royal bull. On one side, below, is a
fortified enclosure with crenelated walls of the type we have described,
and within it a lion and a vase; below this another fort, and a bird
within it. These signs may express the names of the two forts, but,
owing to the fact that at this early period Egyptian orthography was
not yet fixed, we cannot read them. On the other side we see a row of
animated nome-standards of Upper Egypt, with the symbols of the god Min
of Koptos, the hawk of Horus of Edfu, the ibis of Thot of Eshmunên, and
the jackals of Anubis of Abydos, which drag a rope; had we the rest
of the monument, we should see, bound at the end of the rope, some
prisoner, king, or animal symbolic of the North. On another slate
shield, which we also reproduce, we see a symbolical representation of
the capture of seven Northern cities, whose names seem to mean the “Two
Men,” the “Heron,” the “Owl,” the “Palm,” and the “Ghost” Cities.

“Ghost City” is attacked by a lion, “Owl City” by a hawk, “Palm City” by
two hawk nome-standards, and another, whose name we cannot guess at, is
being opened up by a scorpion.

[Illustration: 050.jpg (left) OBVERSE OF A SLATE RELIEF.]

The operating animals evidently represent nomes and tribes of the Upper
Egyptians. Here again we see the same crenelated walls of the Northern
towns, and there is no doubt that this slate fragment also, which is
preserved in the Cairo Museum, is a monument of the conquests of Narmer.
It is executed in the same archaic style as those from Hierakonpolis.
The animals on the other side no doubt represent part of the spoil of
the North.

Returning to the great shield or palette found by Mr. Quibell, we see
the king coming out, followed by his sandal-bearer, the _Hen-neter_ or
“God’s Servant,” * to view the dead bodies of the slain Northerners which
lie arranged in rows, decapitated, and with their heads between their
feet. The king is preceded by a procession of nome-standards.

[Illustration: 051.jpg (right)]

Above the dead men are symbolic representations of a hawk perched on a
harpoon over a boat, and a hawk and a door, which doubtless again refer
to the fights of the royal hawk of Upper Egypt on the Nile and at the
gate of the North. The designs on the mace-heads refer to the same
conquest of the North.

     * In his commentary (Hierakonpolis, i. p. 9) on this scene,
     Prof. Petrie supposes that the seven-pointed star sign means
     “king,” and compares the eight-pointed star “used for king
     in Babylonia.” The eight-pointed star of the cuneiform
     script does not mean “king,” but “god.” The star then ought
     to mean “god,” and the title “servant of a god,” and this
     supposition may be correct. _Hen-neter_, “god’s servant,”
      was the appellation of a peculiar kind of priest in later
     days, and was then spelt with the ordinary sign for a god,
     the picture of an axe. But in the archaic period, with which
     we are dealing, a star like the Babylonian sign may very
     well have been used for “god,” and the title of Narmer’s
     sandal-bearer may read _Hen-neter_. He was the slave of the
     living god Narmer. All Egyptian kings were regarded as
     deities, more or less.

The monuments Khâsekhemui, a king, show us that he conquered the North
also and slew 47,209 “Northern Enemies.” The contorted attitudes of the
dead Northerners were greatly admired and sketched at the time, and were
reproduced on the pedestal of the king’s statue found by Mr. Quibell,
which is now at Oxford. It was an age of cheerful savage energy, like
most times when kingdoms and peoples are in the making. About 4000 B.C.
is the date of these various monuments.

[Illustration: 052.jpg OBVERSE OP A SLATE RELIEF.]

Khâsekhemui probably lived later than Narmer, and we may suppose that
his conquest was in reality a re-conquest. He may have lived as late
as the time of the IId Dynasty, whereas Narmer must be placed at the
beginning of the Ist, and his conquest was probably that which first
united the two kingdoms of the South and North. As we shall see in
the next chapter, he is probably one of the originals of the legendary
“Mena,” who was regarded from the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty onwards
as the founder of the kingdom, and was first made known to Europe by
Herodotus, under the name of “Menés.”

[Illustration: 053.jpg REVERSE OF A SLATE RELIEF, REPRESENTING ANIMALS.]

Narmer is therefore the last of the ancient kings of Hierakonpolis, the
last of Manetho’s “Spirits.” We may possibly have recovered the names of
one or two of the kings anterior to Narmer in the excavations at Abydos
(see Chapter II), but this is uncertain. To all intents and purposes we
have only legendary knowledge of the Southern kingdom until its close,
when Narmer the mighty went forth to strike down the Anu of the North,
an exploit which he recorded in votive monuments at Hierakonpolis, and
which was commemorated henceforward throughout Egyptian history in the
yearly “Feast of the Smiting of the Anu.” Then was Egypt for the first
time united, and the fortress of the “White Wall,” the “Good Abode” of
Memphis, was built to dominate the lower country. The Ist Dynasty was
founded and Egyptian history began.

[Illustration: 054.jpg ]




CHAPTER II--ABYDOS AND THE FIRST THREE DYNASTIES


Until the recent discoveries had been made, which have thrown so much
light upon the early history of Egypt, the traditional order and names
of the kings of the first three Egyptian dynasties were, in default of
more accurate information, retained by all writers on the history of the
period. The names were taken from the official lists of kings at Abydos
and elsewhere, and were divided into dynasties according to the system
of Manetho, whose names agree more or less with those of the lists and
were evidently derived from them ultimately. With regard to the fourth
and later dynasties it was clear that the king-lists were correct, as
their evidence agreed entirely with that of the contemporary monuments.
But no means existed of checking the lists of the first three dynasties,
as no contemporary monuments other than a IVth Dynasty mention of a IId
Dynasty king, Send, had been found. The lists dated from the time of
the XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties, so that it was very possible that with
regard to the earliest dynasties they might not be very correct. This
conclusion gained additional weight from the fact that no monuments of
these earliest kings were ever discovered; it therefore seemed probable
that they were purely legendary figures, in whose time (if they ever did
exist) Egypt was still a semi-barbarous nation. The jejune stories told
about them by Manetho seemed to confirm this idea. Mena, the reputed
founder of the monarchy, was generally regarded as a historical figure,
owing to the persistence of his name in all ancient literary accounts
of the beginnings of Egyptian history; for it was but natural to suppose
that the name of the man who unified Egypt and founded Memphis would
endure in the mouths of the people. But with regard to his successors
no such supposition seemed probable, until the time of Sneferu and the
pyramid-builders.

This was the critical view. Another school of historians accepted all
the kings of the lists as historical _en bloc_, simply because the
Egyptians had registered their names as kings. To them Teta, Ateth, and
Ata were as historical as Mena.

Modern discovery has altered our view, and truth is seen to lie between
the opposing schools, as usual. The kings after Mena do not seem to be
such entirely unhistorical figures as the extreme critics thought;
the names of several of them, e.g. Merpeba, of the Ist Dynasty, are
correctly given in the later lists, and those of others were simply
misread, e. g. that of Semti of the same dynasty, misread “Hesepti” by
the list-makers. On the other hand, Mena himself has become a somewhat
doubtful quantity. The real names of most of the early monarchs of Egypt
have been recovered for us by the latest excavations, and we can now see
when the list-makers of the XIXth Dynasty were right and when they were
wrong, and can distinguish what is legendary in their work from what is
really historical. It is true that they very often appear to have been
wrong, but, on the other hand, they were sometimes unexpectedly near
the mark, and the general number and arrangement of their kings
seems correct; so that we can still go to them for assistance in the
arrangement of the names which are communicated to us by the newly
discovered monuments. Manetho’s help, too, need never be despised
because he was a copyist of copyists; we can still use him to direct our
investigations, and his arrangement of dynasties must still remain the
framework of our chronological scheme, though he does not seem to have
been always correct as to the places in which the dynasties originated.

More than the names of the kings have the new discoveries communicated
to us. They have shed a flood of light on the beginnings of Egyptian
civilization and art, supplementing the recently ascertained facts
concerning the prehistoric age which have been described in the
preceding chapter. The impulse to these discoveries was given by the
work of M. de Morgan, who excavated sites of the early dynastic as
well as of the predynastic age. Among these was a great mastaba-tomb at
Nakâda, which proved to be that of a very early king who bore the name
of Aha, “the Fighter.” The walls of this tomb are crenelated like
those of the early Babylonian palaces and the forts of the Northerners,
already referred to. M. de Morgan early perceived the difference between
the Neolithic antiquities and those of the later archaic period of
Egyptian civilization, to which the tomb at Nakâda belonged. In the
second volume of his great work on the primitive antiquities of Egypt
_(L’Age des Métaux et lé Tombeau Royale de Négadeh)_, he described
the antiquities of the Ist Dynasty which had been found at the time he
wrote. Antiquities of the same primitive period and even of an earlier
date had been discovered by Prof. Flinders Petrie, as has already been
said, at Koptos, at the mouth of the Wadi Hammamat. But though Prof.
Petrie correctly diagnosed the age of the great statues of the god
Min which he found, he was led, by his misdating of the “New Race”
 antiquities from Ballas and Tûkh, also to misdate several of the
primitive antiquities,--the lions and hawks, for instance, found at
Koptos, he placed in the period between the VIIth and Xth Dynasties;
whereas they can now, in the light of further discoveries at Abydos, be
seen to date to the earlier part of the Ist Dynasty, the time of Narmer
and Aha.

It is these discoveries at Abydos, coupled with those (already
described) of Mr. Quibell at Hierakonpolis, which have told us most of
what we know with regard to the history of the first three dynasties.
At Abydos Prof. Petrie was not himself the first in the field, the site
having already been partially explored by a French Egyptologist, M.
Amélineau. The excavations of M. Amélineau were, however, perhaps
not conducted strictly on scientific lines, and his results have been
insufficiently published with very few photographs, so that with the
best will in the world we are unable to give M. Amélineau the full
credit which is, no doubt, due to him for his work. The system of Prof.
Petrie’s publications has been often, and with justice, criticized, but
he at least tells us every year what he has been doing, and gives us
photographs of everything he has found. For this reason the epoch-making
discoveries at Abydos have been coupled chiefly with the name of Prof.
Petrie, while that of M. Amélineau is rarely heard in connection with
them. As a matter of fact, however, M. Amélineau first excavated the
necropolis of the early kings at Abydos, and discovered most of the
tombs afterwards worked over by Prof. Petrie and Mr. Mace. Yet most of
the important scientific results are due to the later explorers, who
were the first to attempt a classification of them, though we must
add that this classification has not been entirely accepted by the
scientific world.

The necropolis of the earliest kings of Egypt is situated in the great
bay in the hills which lies behind Abydos, to the southwest of the main
necropolis. Here, at holy Abydos, where every pious Egyptian wished to
rest after death, the bodies of the most ancient kings were buried. It
is said by Manetho that the original seat of their dominion was This,
a town in the vicinity of Abydos, now represented by the modern Grîrga,
which lies a few miles distant from its site (el-Birba). This may be a
fact, but we have as yet obtained no confirmation of it. It may well be
that the attribution of a Thinite origin to the Ist and IId Dynasties
was due simply to the fact that the kings of these dynasties were buried
at Abydos, which lay within the Thinite nome. Manetho knew that they
were buried at Abydos, and so jumped to the conclusion that they lived
there also, and called them “Thinites.”

[Illustration: 060.jpg PROF. PETRIE’S CAMP AT ABYDOS, 1901.]

Their real place of origin must have been Hierakonpolis, where the
pre-dynastic kingdom of the South had its seat. The Hid Dynasty was no
doubt of Memphite origin, as Manetho says. It is certain that the
seat of the government of the IVth Dynasty was at Memphis, where the
pyramid-building kings were buried, and we know that the sepulchres
of two Hid Dynasty kings, at least, were situated in the necropolis of
Memphis (Sakkâra-Mêdûm). So that probably the seat of government was
transferred from Hierakonpolis to Memphis by the first king of the Hid
Dynasty. Thenceforward the kings were buried in the Memphite necropolis.

The two great nécropoles of Memphis and Abydos were originally the
seats of the worship of the two Egyptian gods of the dead, Seker and
Khentamenti, both of whom were afterwards identified with the Busirite
god Osiris. Abydos was also the centre of the worship of Anubis, an
animal-deity of the dead, the jackal who prowls round the tombs at
night. Anubis and Osiris-Khentamenti, “He who is in the West,” were
associated in the minds of the Egyptians as the protecting deities of
Abydos. The worship of these gods as the chief Southern deities of the
dead, and the preeminence of the necropolis of Abydos in the South, no
doubt date back before the time of the Ist Dynasty, so that it would
not surprise us were burials of kings of the predynastic Hierakonpolite
kingdom discovered at Abydos. Prof. Petrie indeed claims to have
discovered actual royal relics of that period at Abydos, but this seems
to be one of the least certain of his conclusions. We cannot definitely
state that the names “Ro,” “Ka,” and “Sma” (if they are names at all,
which is doubtful) belong to early kings of Hierakonpolis who were
buried at Abydos. It may be so, but further confirmation is desirable
before we accept it as a fact; and as yet such confirmation has not been
forthcoming. The oldest kings, who were certainly buried at Abydos, seem
to have been the first rulers of the united kingdom of the North and
South, Aha and his successors. N’armer is not represented. It may
be that he was not buried at Abydos, but in the necropolis of
Hierakonpolis. This would point to the kings of the South not having
been buried at Abydos until after the unification of the kingdom.

That Aha possessed a tomb at Abydos as well as another at Nakâda seems
peculiar, but it is a phenomenon not unknown in Egypt. Several kings,
whose bodies were actually buried elsewhere, had second tombs at Abydos,
in order that they might _possess_ last resting-places near the tomb
of Osiris, although they might not prefer to _use_ them. Usertsen (or
Senusret) III is a case in point. He was really buried in a pyramid at
Illahun, up in the North, but he had a great rock tomb cut for him in
the cliffs at Abydos, which he never occupied, and probably had never
intended to occupy. We find exactly the same thing far back at the
beginning of Egyptian history, when Aha possessed not only a great
mastaba-tomb at Nakâda, but also a tomb-chamber in the great necropolis
of Abydos. It may be that other kings of the earliest period also had
second sepulchres elsewhere. It is noteworthy that in none of the early
tombs at Abydos were found any bodies which might be considered those
of the kings themselves. M. Amélineau discovered bodies of attendants
or slaves (who were in all probability purposely strangled and buried
around the royal chamber in order that they should attend the king
in the next world), but no royalties. Prof. Petrie found the arm of a
female mummy, who may have been of royal blood, though there is nothing
to show that she was. And the quaint plait and fringe of false hair,
which were also found, need not have belonged to a royal mummy. It is
therefore quite possible that these tombs at Abydos were not the actual
last resting-places of the earliest kings, who may really have been
buried at Hierakonpolis or elsewhere, as Aha was. Messrs. Newberry
and Gtarstang, in their _Short History of Egypt_, suppose that Aha was
actually buried at Abydos, and that the great tomb with objects bearing
his name, found by M. de Morgan at Nakâda, is really not his, but
belonged to a royal princess named Neit-hetep, whose name is found in
conjunction with his at Abydos and Nakâda. But the argument is equally
valid turned round the other way: the Nakâda tomb might just as well be
Aha’s and the Abydos one Neit-hetep’s. Neit-hetep, who is supposed by
Messrs. Newberry and Garstang to have been Narmer’s daughter and Aha’s
wife, was evidently closely connected with Aha, and she may have been
buried with him at Nakâda and commemorated with him at Abydos.* It is
probable that the XIXth Dynasty list-makers and Manetho considered the
Abydos tombs to have been the real graves of the kings, but it is by no
means impossible that they were wrong.

     * A princess named Bener-ab (“Sweet-heart”), who may have
     been Aha’s daughter, was actually buried beside his tomb at
     Abydos.

This view of the royal tombs at Abydos tallies to a great extent with
that of M. Naville, who has energetically maintained the view that M.
Amélineau and Prof. Petrie have not discovered the real tombs of the
early kings, but only their contemporary commemorative “tombs” at
Abydos. The only real tomb of the Ist Dynasty, therefore, as yet
discovered is that of Aha at Nakâda, found by M. de Morgan. The fact
that attendant slaves were buried around the Abydos tombs is no bar to
the view that the tombs were only the monuments, not the real graves,
of the kings. The royal ghosts would naturally visit their commemorative
chambers at Abydos, in order to be in the company of the great Osiris,
and ghostly servants would be as necessary to their Majesties at Abydos
as elsewhere.

It must not be thought that this revised opinion of the Abydos tombs
detracts in the slightest degree from the importance of the discovery of
M. Amélineau and its subsequent and more detailed investigation by Prof.
Petrie. These monuments are as valuable for historical purposes as
the real tombs themselves. The actual bodies of these primeval kings
themselves we are never likely to find. The tomb of Aha at Nakâda had
been completely rifled in ancient times.

The commemorative tombs of the kings of the Ist and IId Dynasties at
Abydos lie southwest of the great necropolis, far within the bay in the
hills. Their present aspect is that of a wilderness of sand hillocks,
covered with masses of fragments of red pottery, from which the site has
obtained the modern Arab name of _Umm el-Ga’ab_, “Mother of Pots.” It
is impossible to move a step in any direction without crushing some
of these potsherds under the heel. They are chiefly the remains of the
countless little vases of rough red pottery, which were dedicated here
as _ex-votos_ by the pious, between the XIXth and XXVIth Dynasties, to
the memory of the ancient kings and of the great god Osiris, whose tomb,
as we shall see, was supposed to have been situated here also.

[Illustration: 065.jpg (right) THE TOMB OF KING DEN AT ABYDOS. About
4000 B.C.]

Intermingled with these later fragments are pieces of the original
Ist Dynasty vases, which were filled with wine and provisions and were
placed in the tombs, for the refreshment and delectation of the royal
ghosts when they should visit their houses at Abydos. These were thrown
out and broken when the tombs were violated. Here and there one sees a
dip in the sand, out of which rise four walls of great bricks, forming
a rectangular chamber, half-filled with sand. This is one of the royal
tomb-chambers of the Ist Dynasty. That of King Den is illustrated above.
A straight staircase descends into it from the ground-level above. In
several of the tombs the original flooring of wooden beams is still
preserved. Den’s is the most magnificent of all, for it has a floor of
granite blocks; we know of no other instance of stone being used for
building in this early age. Almost every tomb has been burnt at some
period unknown. The brick walls are burnt red, and many of the alabaster
vases are almost calcined. This was probably the work of some unknown
enemy.

The wide complicated tombs have around the main chamber a series of
smaller rooms, which were used to store what was considered necessary
for the use of the royal ghost. Of these necessaries the most
interesting to us are the slaves, who were, as there is little reason to
doubt, purposely killed and buried round the royal chamber so that their
spirits should be on the spot when the dead king came to Abydos; thus
they would be always ready to serve him with the food and other things
which had been stored in the tomb with them and placed under their
charge. There were stacks of great vases of wine, corn, and other food;
these were covered up with masses of fat to preserve the contents,
and they were corked with a pottery stopper, which was protected by
a conical clay sealing, stamped with the impress of the royal
cylinder-seal. There were bins of corn, joints of oxen, pottery dishes,
copper pans, and other things which might be useful for the ghostly
cuisine of the tomb. There were numberless small objects, used, no
doubt, by the dead monarch during life, which he would be pleased to see
again in the next world,--carved ivory boxes, little slabs for grinding
eye-paint, golden buttons, model tools, model vases with gold tops,
ivory and pottery figurines, and other _objets d’art_; the golden royal
seal of judgment of King Den in its ivory casket, and so forth. There
were memorials of the royal victories in peace and war, little ivory
plaques with inscriptions commemorating the founding of new buildings,
the institution of new religious festivals in honour of the gods, the
bringing of the captives of the royal bow and spear to the palace, the
discomfiture of the peoples of the North-land.

[Illustration: 067.jpg CONICAL VASE-STOPPERS. From Abydos. 1st Dynasty:
about 4000 B.C.]

All these things, which have done so much to reconstitute for us the
history of the earliest period of the Egyptian monarchy, were placed
under the care of the dead slaves whose bodies were buried round the
empty tomb-chamber of their royal master in Abydos.

The killing and entombment of the royal servants is of the highest
anthropological interest, for it throws a vivid light upon the manners
of the time. It shows the primeval Egyptians as a semi-barbaric people
of childishly simple ways of thought. The king was dead. For all his
kingship he was a man, and no man was immortal in this world. But yet
how could one really die? Shadows, dreams, all kinds of phenomena which
the primitive mind could not explain, induced the belief that, though
the outer man might rot, there was an inner man which could not die
and still lived on. The idea of total death was unthinkable. And where
should this inner man still live on but in the tomb to which the outer
man was consigned? And here, doubtless it was believed, in the house to
which the body was consigned, the ghost lived on. And as each ghost had
his house with the body, so no doubt all ghosts could communicate with
one another from tomb to tomb; and so there grew up the belief in a
tomb-world, a subterranean Egypt of tombs, in which the dead Egyptians
still lived and had their being. Later on the boat of the sun, in which
the god of light crossed the heavens by day, was thought to pass through
this dead world between his setting and his rising, accompanied by the
souls of the righteous. But of this belief we find no trace yet in the
ideas of the Ist Dynasty. All we can see is that the _sahus_, or bodies
of the dead, were supposed to reside in awful majesty in the tomb,
while the ghosts could pass from tomb to tomb through the mazes of
the underworld. Over this dread realm of dead men presided a dead god,
Osiris of Abydos; and so the necropolis of Abydos was the necropolis of
the underworld, to which all ghosts who were not its rightful citizens
would come from afar to pay their court to their ruler. Thus the man
of substance would have a monumental tablet put up to himself in this
necropolis as a sort of _pied-à-terre_, even if he could not be buried
there; for the king, who, for reasons chiefly connected with local
patriotism, was buried near the city of his earthly abode, a second tomb
would be erected, a stately mansion in the city of Osiris, in which his
ghost could reside when it pleased him to come to Abydos.

Now none could live without food, and men living under the earth needed
it as much as men living on the earth. The royal tomb was thus provided
with an enormous amount of earthly food for the use of the royal ghost,
and with other things as well, as we have seen. The same provision had
also to be made for the royal resting-place at Abydos. And in both cases
royal slaves were needed to take care of all this provision, and to
serve the ghost of the king, whether in his real tomb at Nakâda, or
elsewhere, or in his second tomb at Abydos. Ghosts only could serve
ghosts, so that of the slaves ghosts had to be made. That was easily
done; they died when their master died and followed him to the tomb.
No doubt it seemed perfectly natural to all concerned, to the slaves as
much as to anybody else. But it shows the child’s idea of the value of
life. An animate thing was hardly distinguished at this period from an
inanimate thing. The most ancient Egyptians buried slaves with their
kings as naturally as they buried jars of wine and bins of corn with
them. Both were buried with a definite object. The slaves had to die
before they were buried, but then so had the king himself. They all had
to die sometime or other. And the actual killing of them was no worse
than killing a dog, no worse even than “killing” golden buttons and
ivory boxes. For, when the buttons and boxes were buried with the king,
they were just as much dead as the slaves. Of the sanctity of _human_
life as distinct from other life, there was probably no idea at all. The
royal ghost needed ghostly servants, and they were provided as a matter
of course.

But as civilization progressed, the ideas of the Egyptians changed
on these points, and in the later ages of the ancient world they were
probably the most humane of the peoples, far more so than the Greeks,
in fact. The cultured Hellenes murdered their prisoners of war without
hesitation. Who has not been troubled in mind by the execution of Mkias
and Demosthenes after the surrender of the Athenian army at Syracuse?
When we compare this with Grant’s refusal even to take Lee’s sword
at Appomattox, we see how we have progressed in these matters; while
Gylippus and the Syracusans were as much children as the Ist Dynasty
Egyptians. But the Egyptians of Gylippus’s time had probably advanced
much further than the Greeks in the direction of rational manhood. When
Amasis had his rival Apries in his power, he did not put him to death,
but kept him as his coadjutor on the throne. Apries fled from him,
allied himself with Greek pirates, and advanced against his generous
rival. After his defeat and murder at Momemphis, Amasis gave him a
splendid burial. When we compare this generosity to a beaten foe with
the savagery of the Assyrians, for instance, we see how far the later
Egyptians had progressed in the paths of humanity.

The ancient custom of killing slaves was first discontinued at the death
of the lesser chieftains, but we find a possible survival of it in the
case of a king, even as late as the time of the XIth Dynasty; for at
Thebes, in the precinct of the funerary temple of King Neb-hapet-Râ
Mentuhetep and round the central pyramid which commemorated his memory,
were buried a number of the ladies of his _harîm_. They were all buried
at one and the same time, and there can be little doubt that they were
all killed and buried round the king, in order to be with him in the
next world. Now with each of these ladies, who had been turned into
ghosts, was buried a little waxen human figure placed in a little model
coffin. This was to replace her own slave. She who went to accompany
the king in the next world had to have her own attendant also. But, not
being royal, a real slave was not killed for her; she only took with her
a waxen figure, which by means of charms and incantations would, when
she called upon it, turn into a real slave, and say, “Here am I,” and do
whatever work might be required of her. The actual killing and burial
of the slaves had in all cases except that of the king been long
“commuted,” so to speak, into a burial with the dead person of
_ushabtis_, or “Answerers,” little figures like those described above,
made more usually of stone, and inscribed with the name of the deceased.
They were called “Answerers” because they answered the call of their
dead master or mistress, and by magic power became ghostly servants.
Later on they were made of wood and glazed _faïence_, as well as stone.
By this means the greater humanity of a later age sought a relief from
the primitive disregard of the death of others.

Anthropologically interesting as are the results of the excavations at
Umm el-Gra’ab, they are no less historically important. There is no need
here to weary the reader with the details of scientific controversy; it
will suffice to set before him as succinctly and clearly as possible the
net results of the work which has been done.

Messrs. Amélineau and Petrie have found the secondary tombs and have
identified the names of the following primeval kings of Egypt. We
arrange them in their apparent historical order.

1. Aha Men (?).

2. Narmer (or Betjumer) Sma (?).

3. Tjer (or Khent). Besh.

4. Tja Ati.

5. Den Semti.

6. Atjab Merpeba.

7. Semerkha Nekht.

8. Qâ Sen.

9. Khâsekhem (Khâsekhemui)

10. Hetepsekhemui.

11. Räneb.

12. Neneter.

13. Sekhemab Perabsen.


Two or three other names are ascribed by Prof. Petrie to the
Hierakonpolite dynasty of Upper Egypt, which, as it occurs before the
time of Mena and the Ist Dynasty, he calls “Dynasty 0.” Dynasty 0,
however, is no dynasty, and in any case we should prefer to call the
“predynastic” dynasty “Dynasty I.” The names of “Dynasty minus One,”
 however, remain problematical, and for the present it would seem safer
to suspend judgment as to the place of the supposed royal names “Ro” and
“Ka”(Men-kaf), which Prof. Petrie supposes to have been those of two
of the kings of Upper Egypt who reigned before Mena. The king
“Sma”(“Uniter”) is possibly identical with Aha or Narmer, more
probably the latter. It is not necessary to detail the process by which
Egyptologists have sought to identify these thirteen kings with the
successors of Mena in the lists of kings and the Ist and IId Dynasties
of Manetho. The work has been very successful, though not perhaps quite
so completely accomplished as Prof. Petrie himself inclines to believe.
The first identification was made by Prof. Sethe, of Gottingen, who
pointed out that the names Semti and Merpeba on a vase-fragment found
by M. Amélineau were in reality those of the kings Hesepti and Merbap
of the lists, the Ousaphaïs and Miebis of Manetho. The perfectly certain
identifications are these:--

5. Den Semti = Hesepti, _Ousaphaïs_, Ist Dynasty.

6. Atjab Merpeba = Merbap, _Miebis_, Ist Dynasty.

7. Semerkha Nekht= Shemsu or Semsem (?), _Semempres_, Ist Dynasty.

8. Qâ Sen = Qebh, _Bienehhes_, Ist Dynasty.

9. Khâsekhemui Besh = Betju-mer (?), _Boethos_, IId Dynasty.

10. Neneter = Bineneter, _Binothris_, IId Dynasty.


Six of the Abydos kings have thus been identified with names in the
lists and in Manetho; that is to say, we now know the real names of six
of the earliest Egyptian monarchs, whose appellations are given us
under mutilated forms by the later list-makers. Prof. Petrie further
identifies (4) Tja Ati with Ateth, (3) Tjer with Teta, and (1) Aha with
Mena. Mena, Teta, Ateth, Ata, Hesepti, Merbap, Shemsu (?), and Qebh are
the names of the 1st Dynasty as given in the lists. The equivalent of
Ata Prof. Petrie finds in the name “Merneit,” which is found at Umm
el-Ga’ab. But there is no proof whatever that Merneit was a king; he
was much more probably a prince or other great personage of the reign
of Den, who was buried with the kings. Prof. Petrie accepts the
identification of the personal name of Aha as “Men,” and so makes him
the only equivalent of Mena. But this reading of the name is still
doubtful. Arguing that Aha must be Mena, and having all the rest of the
kings of the Ist Dynasty identified with the names in the lists, Prof.
Petrie is compelled to exclude Narmer from the dynasty, and to relegate
him to “Dynasty 0,” before the time of Mena. It is quite possible,
however, that Narmer was the successor, not the predecessor, of Mena.
He was certainly either the one or the other, as the style of art in his
time was exactly the same as that in the time of Aha. The “Scorpion,”
 too, whose name is found at Hierakonpolis, certainly dates to the same
time as Narmer and Aha, for the style of his work is the same. And it
may well be that he is not to be counted as a separate king, belonging
to “Dynasty 0 “(or “Dynasty -I”) at all, but as identical with Narmer,
just as “Sma” may also be. We thus find that the two kings who left the
most developed remains at Hierakonpolis are the two whose monuments at
Abydos are the oldest of all on that site. That is to say, the kings
whose monuments record the conquest of the North belong to the period
of transition from the old Hierakonpolite dominion of Upper Egypt to the
new kingdom of all Egypt. They, in fact, represent the “Mena” or Menés
of tradition. It may be that Aha bore the personal name of _Men_, which
would thus be the original of Mena, but this is uncertain. In any case
both Aha and Narmer must be assigned to the Ist Dynasty, with the result
that we know of more kings belonging to the dynasty than appear in the
lists.

Nor is this improbable. Manetho’s list is evidently based upon old
Egyptian lists derived from the authorities upon which the king-lists of
Abydos and Sakkâra were based. These old lists were made under the
XIXth Dynasty, when an interest in the oldest kings seems to have been
awakened, and the ruling monarchs erected temples at Abydos in their
honour. This phenomenon can only have been due to a discovery of Umm
el-Ga’ab and its treasures, the tombs of which were recognized as
the burial-places (real or secondary) of the kings before the
pyramid-builders. Seti I. and his son Ramses then worshipped the kings
of Umm el-Ga’ab, with their names set before them in the order, number,
and spelling in which the scribes considered they ought to be inscribed.
It is highly probable that the number known at that time was not quite
correct. We know that the spelling of the names was very much garbled
(to take one example only, the signs for _Sen_ were read as one sign
_Qebh_), so that one or two kings may have been omitted or displaced.
This may be the case with Narmer, or, as his name ought possibly to be
read, _Betjumer_. His monuments show by their style that he belongs to
the very beginning of the Ist Dynasty. No name in the Ist Dynasty list
corresponds to his. But one of the lists gives for the first king of the
IId Dynasty (the successor of “Qebh” = Sen) a name which may also be read
Betjumer, spelt syllabically this time, not ideographically. On this
account Prof. Naville wishes to regard the Hierakonpolite monuments of
Narmer as belonging to the IId Dynasty, but, as we have seen, they are
among the most archaic known, and certainly must belong to the beginning
of the Ist Dynasty. It is therefore probable that Khasekhemui Besh
and Narmer (Betjumer?) were confused by this list-maker, and the
name Betjumer was given to the first king of the IId Dynasty, who was
probably in reality Khasekhemui. The resemblance of _Betju_ to _Besh_
may have contributed to this confusion.

So Narmer (or Betjumer) found his way out of his proper place at the
beginning of the 1st Dynasty. Whether Aha was also called “Men” or not,
it seems evident that he and Narmer were jointly the originals of the
legendary Mena. Narmer, who possibly also bore the name of Sma, “the
Uniter,” conquered the North. Aha, “the Fighter,” also ruled both South
and North at the same period. Khasekhemui, too, conquered the North, but
the style of his monuments shows such an advance upon that of the days
of Aha and Narmer that it seems best to make him the successor of Sen
(or “Qebh “), and, explaining the transference of the name Betjumer
to the beginning of the IId Dynasty as due to a confusion with
Khasekhemui’s personal name Besh, to make Khasekhemui the founder of the
IId Dynasty. The beginning of a new dynasty may well have been marked
by a reassertion of the new royal power over Lower Egypt, which may have
lapsed somewhat under the rule of the later kings of the Ist Dynasty.

Semti is certainly the “Hesepti” of the lists, and Tja Ati is probably
“Ateth.” “Ata” is thus unidentified. Prof. Petrie makes him = Merneit,
but, as has already been said, there is no proof that the tomb of
Merneit is that of a king. “Teta” may be Tjer or Khent, but of this
there is no proof. It is most probable that the names “Teta,” “Ateth,”
 and “Ata” are all founded on Ati, the personal name of Tja. The king
Tjer is then not represented in the lists, and “Mena” is a compound of
the two oldest Abydos kings, Narmer (Betjumer) Sma (?) and Aha Men (?).

These are the bare historical results that have been attained with
regard to the names, identity, and order of the kings. The smaller
memorials that have been found with them, especially the ivory plaques,
have told us of events that took place during their reigns; but, with
the exception of the constantly recurring references to the conquest of
the North, there is little that can be considered of historical interest
or importance. We will take one as an example. This is the tablet No.
32,650 of the British Museum, illustrated by Prof. Petrie, _Royal Tombs_
i (Egypt Exploration Fund), pi. xi, 14, xv, 16. This is the record of
a single year, the first in the reign of Semti, King of Upper and Lower
Egypt. On it we see a picture of a king performing a religious dance
before the god Osiris, who is seated in a shrine placed on a dais. This
religious dance was performed by all the kings in later times. Below we
find hieroglyphic (ideographic) records of a river expedition to fight
the Northerners and of the capture of a fortified town called An. The
capture of the town is indicated by a broken line of fortification,
half-encircling the name, and the hoe with which the emblematic hawks
on the slate reliefs already described are armed; this signifies the
opening and breaking down of the wall.

On the other half of the tablet we find the viceroy of Lower Egypt,
Hemaka, mentioned; also “the Hawk (i. e. the king) seizes the seat of
the Libyans,” and some unintelligible record of a jeweller of the palace
and a king’s carpenter. On a similar tablet (of Sen) we find the words
“the king’s carpenter made this record.” All these little tablets are
then the records of single years of a king’s life, and others like them,
preserved no doubt in royal archives, formed the base of regular annals,
which were occasionally carved upon stone. We have an example of one of
these in the “Stele of Palermo,” a fragment of black granite, inscribed
with the annals of the kings up to the time of the Vth Dynasty, when
the monument itself was made. It is a matter for intense regret that the
greater portion of this priceless historical monument has disappeared,
leaving us but a piece out of the centre, with part of the records
of only six kings before Snefru. Of these six the name of only one,
Neneter, of the lid Dynasty, whose name is also found at Abydos, is
mentioned. The only important historical event of Neneter’s reign seems
to have occurred in his thirteenth year, when the towns or palaces of
_Ha_ (“North”) and Shem-Râ (“The Sun proceeds”) were founded. Nothing
but the institution and celebration of religious festivals is recorded
in the sixteen yearly entries preserved to us out of a reign of
thirty-five years. The annual height of the Nile is given, and the
occasions of numbering the people are recorded (every second year):
nothing else. Manetho tells us that in the reign of Binothris, who
is Neneter, it was decreed that women could hold royal honours and
privileges. This first concession of women’s rights is not mentioned on
the strictly official “Palermo Stele.”

More regrettable than aught else is the absence from the “Palermo Stele”
 of that part of the original monument which gave the annals of the
earliest kings. At any rate, in the lines of annals which still exist
above that which contains the chronicle of the reign of Neneter no
entry can be definitely identified as belonging to the reigns of Aha
or Narmer. In a line below there is a mention of the “birth of
Khâsekhemui,” apparently a festival in honour of the birth of that king
celebrated in the same way as the reputed birthday of a god. This shows
the great honour in which Khâsekhemui was held, and perhaps it was he
who really finally settled the question of the unification of North and
South and consolidated the work of the earlier kings.

As far as we can tell, then, Aha and Narmer were the first conquerors
of the North, the unifiers of the kingdom, and the originals of the
legendary Mena. In their time the kingdom’s centre of gravity was still
in the South, and Narmer (who is probably identical with “the Scorpion”)
dedicated the memorials of his deeds in the temple of Hierakonpolis. It
may be that the legend of the founding of Memphis in the time of “Menés”
 is nearly correct (as we shall see, historically, the foundation may
have been due to Merpeba), but we have the authority of Manetho for
the fact that the first two dynasties were “Thinite” (that is, Upper
Egyptian), and that Memphis did not become the capital till the time of
the Hid Dynasty. With this statement the evidence of the monuments fully
agrees. The earliest royal tombs in the pyramid-field of Memphis date
from the time of the Hid Dynasty, so that it is evident that the kings
had then taken up their abode in the Northern capital. We find that soon
after the time of Khâsekhemui the king Perabsen was especially connected
with Lower Egypt. His personal name is unknown to us (though he may
be the “Uatjnes” of the lists), but we do know that he had two
banner-names, Sekhem-ab and Perabsen. The first is his hawk or
Horus-name, the second his Set-name; that is to say, while he bore the
first name as King of Upper Egypt under the special patronage of Horus,
the hawk-god of the Upper Country, he bore the second as King of Lower
Egypt, under the patronage of Set, the deity of the Delta, whose fetish
animal appears above this name instead of the hawk. This shows how
definitely Perabsen wished to appear as legitimate King of Lower as well
as Upper Egypt. In later times the Theban kings of the XIIth Dynasty,
when they devoted themselves to winning the allegiance of the
Northerners by living near Memphis rather than at Thebes, seem to have
been imitating the successors of Khâsekhemui.

Moreover, we now find various evidences of increasing connection with
the North. A princess named Ne-maat-hap, who seems to have been the
mother of Sa-nekht, the first king of the Hid Dynasty, bears the name of
the sacred Apis of Memphis, her name signifying “Possessing the right of
Apis.” According to Manetho, the kings of the Hid Dynasty are the first
Memphites, and this seems to be quite correct. With Ne-maat-hap the
royal right seems to have been transferred to a Memphite house. But the
Memphites still had associations with Upper Egypt: two of them, Tjeser
Khet-neter and Sa-nekht, were buried near Abydos, in the desert at Bêt
Khallâf, where their tombs were discovered and excavated by Mr. Garstang
in 1900. The tomb of Tjeser is a great brick-built mastaba, forty feet
high and measuring 300 feet by 150 feet. The actual tomb-chambers are
excavated in the rock, twenty feet below the ground-level and sixty feet
below the top of the mastaba. They had been violated in ancient times,
but a number of clay jar-sealings, alabaster vases, and bowls belonging
to the tomb furniture were found by the discoverer. Sa-nekht’s tomb is
similar. In it was found the preserved skeleton of its owner, who was a
giant seven feet high.

[Illustration: 082.jpg THE TOMB OF KING TJESER AT BÊT KHALLÂF. About
3700 B.C.]

It is remarkable that Manetho chronicles among the kings of the early
period a king named Sesokhris, who was five cubits high. This may have
been Sa-nekht.

Tjeser had two tombs, one, the above-mentioned, near Abydos, the
other at Sakkâra, in the Memphite pyramid-field. This is the famous
Step-Pyramid. Since Sa-nekht seems really to have been buried at Bêt
Khal-laf, probably Tjeser was, too, and the Step-Pyramid may have been
his secondary or sham tomb, erected in the necropolis of Memphis as a
compliment to Seker, the Northern god of the dead, just as Aha had his
secondary tomb at Abydos in compliment to Khentamenti. Sne-feru, also,
the last king of the Hid Dynasty, seems to have had two tombs. One of
these was the great Pyramid of Mêdûm, which was explored by Prof. Petrie
in 1891, the other was at Dashûr. Near by was the interesting necropolis
already mentioned, in which was discovered evidence of the continuance
of the cramped position of burial and of the absence of mummification
among a certain section of the population even as late as the time of
the IVth Dynasty. This has been taken to imply that the fusion of the
primitive Neolithic and invading sub-Semitic races had not been effected
at that time.

With the IVth Dynasty the connection of the royal house with the South
seems to have finally ceased. The governmental centre of gravity was
finally transferred to Memphis, and the kings were thenceforth for
several centuries buried in the great pyramids which still stand in
serried order along the western desert border of Egypt, from the Delta
to the province of the Fayyum. With the latest discoveries in this
Memphite pyramid-field we shall deal in the next chapter.

The transference of the royal power to Memphis under the Hid Dynasty
naturally led to a great increase of Egyptian activity in the Northern
lands. We read in Manetho of a great Libyan war in the reign of
Neche-rophes, and both Sa-nekht and Tjeser seem to have finally
established Egyptian authority in the Sinaitic peninsula, where their
rock-inscriptions have been found.

In 1904 Prof. Petrie was despatched to Sinai by the Egypt Exploration
Fund, in order finally to record the inscriptions of the early kings
in the Wadi Maghara, which had been lately very much damaged by the
operations of the turquoise-miners. It seems almost incredible that
ignorance and vandalism should still be so rampant in the twentieth
century that the most important historical monuments are not safe from
desecration in order to obtain a few turquoises, but it is so. Prof.
Petrie’s expedition did not start a day too soon, and at the suggestion
of Sir William Garstin, the adviser to the Ministry of the Interior, the
majority of the inscriptions have been removed to the Cairo Museum for
safety and preservation. Among the new inscriptions discovered is one of
Sa-nekht, which is now in the British Museum. Tjeser and Sa-nekht were
not the first Egyptian kings to visit Sinai. Already, in the days of the
1st Dynasty, Semerkha had entered that land and inscribed his name upon
the rocks. But the regular annexation, so to speak, of Sinai to Egypt
took place under the Memphites of the Hid Dynasty.

With the Hid Dynasty we have reached the age of the pyramid-builders.
The most typical pyramids are those of the three great kings of the IVth
Dynasty, Khufu, Khafra, and Menkaura, at Giza near Cairo. But, as
we have seen, the last king of the Hid Dynasty, Snefru, also had one
pyramid, if not two; and the most ancient of these buildings known to
us, the Step-Pyramid of Sakkâra, was erected by Tjeser at the beginning
of that dynasty. The evolution of the royal tombs from the time of the
1st Dynasty to that of the IVth is very interesting to trace. At the
period of transition from the predynastic to the dynastic age we have
the great mastaba of Aha at Nakâda, and the simplest chamber-tombs
at Abydos. All these were of brick; no stone was used in their
construction. Then we find the chamber-tomb of Den Semti at Abydos
with a granite floor, the walls being still of brick. Above each of the
Abydos tombs was probably a low mound, and in front a small chapel, from
which a flight of steps descended into the simple chamber. On one of the
little plaques already mentioned, which were found in these tombs, we
have an archaic inscription, entirely written in ideographs, which
seems to read, “The Big-Heads (i. e. the chiefs) come to the tomb.” The
ideograph for “tomb” seems to be a rude picture of the funerary chapel,
but from it we can derive little information as to its construction.
Towards the end of the Ist Dynasty, and during the lid, the royal tombs
became much more complicated, being surrounded with numerous chambers
for the dead slaves, etc. Khâsekhemui’s tomb has thirty-three such
chambers, and there is one large chamber of stone. We know of no other
instance of the use of stone work for building at this period except in
the royal tombs. No doubt the mason’s art was still so difficult that it
was reserved for royal use only.

Under the Hid Dynasty we find the last brick mastabas built for royalty,
at Bêt Khallâf, and the first pyramids, in the Memphite necropolis.
In the mastaba of Tjeser at Bêt Khallâf stone was used for the great
portcullises which were intended to bar the way to possible plunderers
through the passages of the tomb. The Step-Pyramid at Sakkâra is, so to
speak, a series of mastabas of stone, imposed one above the other; it
never had the continuous casing of stone which is the mark of a true
pyramid. The pyramid of Snefru at Mêdûm is more developed. It also
originated in a mastaba, enlarged, and with another mastaba-like
erection on the top of it; but it was given a continuous sloping casing
of fine limestone from bottom to top, and so is a true pyramid. A
discussion of recent theories as to the building of the later pyramids
of the IVth Dynasty will be found in the next chapter.

In the time of the Ist Dynasty the royal tomb was known by the name of
“Protection-around-the-Hawk, i.e. the king”(_Sa-ha-heru_); but under
the Hid and IVth Dynasties regular names, such as “the Firm,” “the
Glorious,” “the Appearing,” etc., were given to each pyramid.

[Illustration: 086.jpg FALSE DOOR OF THE TOMB OF TETA, about 3600 B.C.]

We must not omit to note an interesting point in connection with the
royal tombs at Abydos, In that of King Khent or Tjer (the reading of
the ideograph is doubtful) M. Amélineau found a large bed or bier of
granite, with a figure of the god Osiris lying in state sculptured in
high relief upon it. This led him to jump to the conclusion that he
had found the tomb of the god Osiris himself, and that a skull he found
close by was the veritable cranium of the primeval folk-hero, who,
according to the euhemerist theory, was the deified original of the god.
The true explanation is given by Dr. Wallis Budge in his _History of
Egypt_, i, p. 19. It is a fact that the tomb of Tjer was regarded by
the Egyptians of the XIXth Dynasty as the veritable tomb of Osiris.
They thought they had discovered it, just as M. Amélineau did. When the
ancient royal tombs of Umm el-Ga’ab were rediscovered and identified at
the beginning of the XIXth Dynasty, and Seti I built the great temple of
Abydos to the divine ancestors in honour of the discovery, embellishing
it with a relief of himself and his son Ramses making offerings to the
names of his predecessors (the “Tablet of Abydos “), the name of King
Khent or Tjer (which is perhaps the really correct original form) was
read by the royal scribes as “Khent” and hastily identified with the
first part of the name of the god _Khent-amenti_ Osiris, the lord of
Abydos. The tomb was thus regarded as the tomb of Osiris himself, and
it was furnished with a great stone figure of the god lying on his bier,
attended by the two hawks of Isis and Nephthys; ever after the site was
visited by crowds of pilgrims, who left at Umm el-Ga’ab the thousands of
little votive vases whose fragments have given the place its name of the
“Mother of Pots.” This is the explanation of the discovery of the “Tomb
of Osiris.” We have not found what M. Amélineau seems rather naively to
have thought possible, a confirmation of the ancient view that Osiris
was originally a man who ruled over Egypt and was deified after his
death; but we have found that the Egyptians themselves were more or less
euhemerists, and did think so.

It may seem remarkable that all this new knowledge of ancient Egypt is
derived from tombs and has to do with the resting-places of the kings
when dead, rather than with their palaces or temples when living. Of
temples at this early period we have no trace. The oldest temple in
Egypt is perhaps the little chapel in front of the pyramid of Snefru at
Mêdûm. We first hear of temples to the gods under the IVth Dynasty, but
of the actual buildings of that period we have recovered nothing but one
or two inscribed blocks of stone. Prof. Petrie has traced out the plan
of the oldest temple of Osiris at Abydos, which may be of the time of
Khufu, from scanty evidences which give us but little information. It is
certain, however, that this temple, which is clearly one of the oldest
in Egypt, goes back at least to his time. Its site is the mound
called Kom es-Sultan, “The Mound of the King,” close to the village of
el-Kherba, and on the borders of the cultivation northeast of the royal
tombs at Umm el-Oa’ab.

Of royal palaces we have more definite information. North of the Kom
es-Sultan are two great fortress-enclosures of brick: the one is known
as _Sûnet es-Zebîb_, “the Storehouse of Dried Orapes;” the other is
occupied by the Coptic monastery of Dêr Anba Musâs. Both are certainly
fortress-palaces of the earliest period of the Egyptian monarchy. We
know from the small record-plaques of this period that the kings were
constantly founding or repairing places of this kind, which were always
great rectangular enclosures with crenelated brick walls like those of
early Babylonian buildings.

We have seen that the Northern Egyptian possessed similar
fortress-cities which were captured by Narmer. These were the seats of
the royal residence in various parts of the country. Behind their walls
was the king’s house, and no doubt also a town of nobles and retainers,
while the peasants lived on the arable land without.

[Illustration: 089.jpg THE SHUNET EZ-ZEBIB: THE FORTRESS-TOWN, About
3900 B.C.]

The Shûnet ez-Zebîb and its companion fortress were evidently the royal
cities of the 1st and IId Dynasties at Abydos. The former has been
excavated by Mr. E. R. Ayrton for the Egypt Exploration Fund, under the
supervision of Prof. Petrie. He found jar-sealings of Khâsekhemui and
Perabsen. In later times the place was utilized as a burial-place for
ibis-mummies (it had already been abandoned as a city before the time of
the XIIth Dynasty), and from this fact it received the name of _Shenet
deb-hib_, or “Storehouse of Ibis Burials.” The Arab invaders adapted
this name to their own language in the nearest form which would have
any meaning, as _Shûnet ez-Zebïb_, “the Storehouse of Dried Grapes.”
 The Arab word _shûna_ (“Barn” or “Storehouse”) was, it should be noted,
taken over from the Coptic _sheune,_ which is the old-Egyptian _shenet_.
The identity of _sheune_ or _shûna_ with the German “Scheune” is a
quaint and curious coincidence. In the illustration of the Shûnet
ez-Zebib the curved line of crenelated wall, following the contour of
the hill, should be noted, as it is a remarkable example of the building
of this early period.

It will have been seen from the foregoing description of what
far-reaching importance the discoveries at Abydos have been. A new
chapter of the history of the human race has been opened, which contains
information previously undreamt of, information which Egyptologists
had never dared to hope would be recovered. The sand of Egypt indeed
conceals inexhaustible treasures, and no one knows what the morrow’s
work may bring forth.

_Ex Africa semper aliquid novi!_




CHAPTER III--MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS


Memphis, the “beautiful abode,” the “City of the White Wall,” is said
to have been founded by the legendary Menés, who in order to build it
diverted the stream of the Nile by means of a great dyke constructed
near the modern village of Koshêsh, south of the village of Mitrahêna,
which marks the central point of the ancient metropolis of Northern
Egypt. It may be that the city was founded by Aha or Narmer, the
historical originals of Mena or Menés; but we have another theory with
regard to its foundation, that it was originally built by King Merpeba
Atjab, whose tomb was also discovered at Abydos near those of Aha and
Narmer. Merpeba is the oldest king whose name is absolutely identified
with one occurring in the XIXth Dynasty king-lists and in Manetho. He
is certainly the “Merbap” or “Merbepa” (“Merbapen”) of the lists and the
_Miebis_ of Manetho. In both the lists and in Manetho he stands fifth in
order from Mena, and he was therefore the sixth king of the Ist Dynasty.
The lists, Manetho, and the small monuments in his own tomb agree in
making him the immediate successor of Semti Den (Ousaphaïs), and from
the style of these latter it is evident that he comes after Tja, Tjer,
Narmer, and Aha. That is to say, the contemporary evidence makes him the
fifth king from Aha, the first original of “Menés.”

Now after the piety of Seti I had led him to erect a great temple at
Abydos in memory of the ancient kings, whose sepulchres had probably
been brought to light shortly before, and to compile and set up in the
temple a list of his predecessors, a certain pious snobbery or snobbish
piety impelled a worthy named Tunure, who lived at Memphis, to put up in
his own tomb at Sakkâra a tablet of kings like the royal one at Abydos.
If Osiris-Khentamenti at Abydos had his tablet of kings, so should
Osiris-Seker at Sakkâra. But Tunure does not begin his list with Mena;
his initial king is Merpeba. For him Merpeba was the first monarch to be
commemorated at Sakkâra. Does not this look very much as if the strictly
historical Merpeba, not the rather legendary and confused Mena, was
regarded as the first Memphite king? It may well be that it was in
the reign of Merpeba, not in that of Aha or Narmer, that Memphis was
founded.

The XIXth Dynasty lists of course say nothing about Mena or Merpeba
having founded Memphis; they only give the names of the kings, nothing
more. The earliest authority for the ascription of Memphis to “Menés”,
is Herodotus, who was followed in this ascription, as in many other
matters, by Manetho; but it must be remembered that Manetho was writing
for the edification of a Greek king (Ptolemy Philadelphus) and his Greek
court at Alexandria, and had therefore to evince a respect for the great
Greek classic which he may not always have really felt. Herodotus is
not, of course, accused of any wilful misstatement in this or in any
other matter in which his accuracy is suspected. He merely wrote
down what he was told by the Egyptians themselves, and Merpeba was
sufficiently near in time to Aha to be easily confounded with him by
the scribes of the Persian period, who no doubt ascribed everything
to “Mena” that was done by the kings of the Ist and IId Dynasties.
Therefore it may be considered quite probable that the “Menés” who
founded Memphis was Merpeba, the fifth or sixth king of the Ist Dynasty,
whom Tunure, a thousand years before the time of Herodotus and his
informants, placed at the head of the Memphite “List of Sakkâra.”

The reconquest of the North by Khâsekhemui doubtless led to a further
strengthening of Memphis; and it is quite possible that the deeds of
this king also contributed to make up the sum total of those ascribed to
the Herodotean and Manethonian Menés.

It may be that a town of the Northerners existed here before the time of
the Southern Conquest, for Phtah, the local god of Memphis, has a very
marked character of his own, quite different from that of Khen-tamenti,
the Osiris of Abydos. He is always represented as a little bow-legged
hydrocephalous dwarf very like the Phoenician _Kabeiroi_. It may be
that here is another connection between the Northern Egyptians and the
Semites. The name “Phtah,” the “Opener,” is definitely Semitic. We may
then regard the dwarf Phtah as originally a non-Egyptian god of the
Northerners, probably Semitic in origin, and his town also as antedating
the conquest. But it evidently was to the Southerners that Memphis owed
its importance and its eventual promotion to the position of capital of
the united kingdom. Then the dwarf Phtah saw himself rivalled by another
Phtah of Southern Egyptian origin, who had been installed at Memphis by
the Southerners. This Phtah was a sort of modified edition of Osiris, in
mummy-form and holding crook and whip, but with a refined edition of
the Kabeiric head of the indigenous Phtah. The actual god of “the White
Wall” was undoubtedly confused vith the dead god of the necropolis,
whose name was Seker or Sekri (Sokari), “the Coffined.” The original
form of this deity was a mummied hawk upon a coffin, and it is very
probable that he was imported from the South, like the second Phtah, at
the time of the conquest, when the great Northern necropolis began
to grow up as a duplicate of that at Abydos. Later on we find Seker
confused with the ancient dwarf-god, and it is the latter who was
afterwards chiefly revered as Phtah-Socharis-Osiris, the protector of
the necropolis, the mummied Phtah being the generally recognized ruler
of the City of the White Wall.

It is from the name of Seker that the modern Sak-kâra takes its title.
Sakkâra marks the central point of the great Memphite necropolis, as it
is the nearest point of the western desert to Memphis. Northwards the
necropolis extended to Griza and Abu Roâsh, southwards, to Daslmr;
even the nécropoles of Lisht and Mêdûm may be regarded as appanages of
Sakkâra. At Sakkâra itself Tjeser of the IIId Dynasty had a pyramid,
which, as we have seen, was probably not his real tomb (which was
the great mastaba at Bêt Khallâf), but a secondary or sham tomb
corresponding to the “tombs” of the earliest kings at Umm el-Ga’ab in
the necropolis of Abydos. Many later kings, however, especially of the
Vith Dynasty, were actually buried at Sakkâra. Their tombs have all been
thoroughly described by their discoverer, Prof. Maspero, in his history.
The last king of the Hid Dynasty, Snefru, was buried away down south at
Mêdûm, in splendid isolation, but he may also have had a second pyramid
at Sakkâra or Abu Roash.

The kings of the IVth Dynasty were the greatest of the pyramid builders,
and to them belong the huge edifices of Griza. The Vth Dynasty favoured
Abusîr, between Cîza and Sakkâra; the Vith, as we have said, preferred
Sakkâra itself. With them the end of the Old Kingdom and of Memphite
dominion was reached; the sceptre fell from the hands of the Memphite
kings and was taken up by the princes of Herakleopolis (Ahnasyet
el-Medina, near Béni Suêf, south of the Eayyûm) and Thebes. Where the
Herakleopolite kings were buried we do not know; probably somewhere in
the local necropolis of the Gebel es-Sedment, between Ahnasya and the
Fayyûm. The first Thebans (the XIth Dynasty) were certainly buried at
Thebes, but when the Herakleopolites had finally disappeared, and all
Egypt was again united under one strong sceptre, the Theban kings seem
to have been drawn northwards. They removed to the seat of the dominion
of those whom they had supplanted, and they settled in the neighbourhood
of Herakleopolis, near the fertile province of the Fayyûm, and between
it and Memphis. Here, in the royal fortress-palace of Itht-taui,
“Controlling the Two Lands,” the kings of the XIIth Dynasty lived,
and they were buried in the nécropoles of Dashûr, Lisht, and Illahun
(Hawara), in pyramids like those of the old Memphite kings. These facts,
of the situation of Itht-taui, of their burial in the southern an ex of
the old necropolis of Memphis, and of the fori of their tombs (the
true Upper Egyptian and Thebian form was a rock-cut gallery and chamber
driven deep into the hill), show how solicitous were the Amenemhats
and Senusrets of the suffrages of Lower Egypt, how anxious they were to
conciliate the ancient royal pride of Memphis.

Where the kings of the XIIIth Dynasty and the Hyksos or “Shepherds” were
buried, we do not know. The kings of the restored Theban empire were
all interred at Thebes. There are, in fact, no known royal sepulchres
between the Fayyûm and Abydos. The great kings were mostly buried in
the neighbourhood of Memphis, Abydos, and Thebes. The sepulchres of the
“Middle Empire”--the XIth to XIIIth Dynasties--in the neighbourhood
of the Fayyûm may fairly be grouped with those of the same period at
Dashûr, which belongs to the necropolis of Memphis, since it is only a
mile or two south of Sakkâra.

It is chiefly with regard to the sepulchres of the kings that the most
momentous discoveries of recent years have been made at Thebes, and at
Sakkâra, Abusîr, Dashûr, and Lisht, as at Abydos. For this reason we
deal in succession with the finds in the nécropoles of Abydos, Memphis,
and Thebes respectively. And with the sepulchres of the “Old Kingdom,”
 in the Memphite necropolis proper, we have naturally grouped those of
the “Middle Kingdom” at Dashûr, Lisht, Illahun, and Hawara.

Some of these modern discoveries have been commented on and illustrated
by Prof. Maspero in his great history. But the discoveries that have
been made since this publication have been very important,--those at
Abusîr, indeed, of first-rate importance, though not so momentous as
those of the tombs of the Ist and IId Dynasties at Abydos, already
described. At Abu Roash and at Gîza, at the northern end of the Memphite
necropolis, several expeditions have had considerable success, notably
those of the American Dr. Reisner, assisted by Mr. Mace, who excavated
the royal tombs at Umm el-Ga’ab for Prof. Petrie, those of the
German Drs. Steindorff and Borchardt,--the latter working for the
_Beutsch-Orient Gesellschaft_,--and those of other American excavators.
Until the full publication of the results of these excavations appears,
very little can be said about them. Many mastaba-tombs have, it is
understood, been found, with interesting remains. Nothing of great
historical importance seems to have been discovered, however. It is
otherwise when we come to the discoveries of Messrs. Borchardt and
Schâfer at Abusîr, south of Gîza and north of Sakkâra. At this place
results of first-rate historical importance have been attained.

The main group of pyramids at Abusir consists of the tombs of the kings
Sahurà, Neferarikarâ, and Ne-user-Râ, of the Vth Dynasty. The pyramids
themselves are smaller than those of Gîza, but larger than those of
Sakkâra. In general appearance and effect they resemble those of Gîza,
but they are not so imposing, as the desert here is low. Those of Gîza,
Sakkâra, and Dashûr owe much of their impressiveness to the fact that
they are placed at some height above the cultivated land. The excavation
and planning of these pyramids were carried out by Messrs. Borchardt and
Schâfer at the expense of Baron von Bissing, the well-known Egyptologist
of Munich, and of the _Deutsch-Orient Gesell-schaft_ of Berlin. The
antiquities found have been divided between the museums of Berlin and
Cairo.

One of the most noteworthy discoveries was that of the funerary temple
of Ne-user-Râ, which stood at the base of his pyramid. The plan is
interesting, and the granite lotus-bud columns found are the most
ancient yet discovered in Egypt. Much of the paving and the wainscoting
of the walls was of fine black marble, beautifully polished. An
interesting find was a basin and drain with lion’s-head mouth, to
carry away the blood of the sacrifices. Some sculptures in relief were
discovered, including a gigantic representation of the king and the
goddess Isis, which shows that in the early days of the Vth Dynasty the
king and the gods were already depicted in exactly the same costume as
they wore in the days of the Ramses and the Ptolemies. The hieratic art
of Egypt had, in fact, now taken on itself the final outward appearance
which it retained to the very end. There is no more of the archaism
and absence of conventionality, which marks the art of the earliest
dynasties.

We can trace by successive steps the swift development of Egyptian art
from the rude archaism of the Ist Dynasty to its final consummation
under the Vth, when the conventions became fixed. In the time of
Khäsekhemui, at the beginning of the IId Dynasty, the archaic character
of the art has already begun to wear off. Under the same dynasty we
still have styles of unconventional naïveté, such as the famous Statue
“No. 1” of the Cairo Museum, bearing the names of Kings Hetepahaui,
Neb-râ, and Neneter. But with the IVth Dynasty we no longer look for
unconventionality. Prof. Petrie discovered at Abydos a small ivory
statuette of Khufu or Cheops, the builder of the Great Pyramid of Gîza.
The portrait is a good one and carefully executed. It was not till
the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, indeed, that the Egyptians ceased
to portray their kings as they really were, and gave them a purely
conventional type of face. This convention, against which the heretical
King Amenhetep IV (Akhunaten) rebelled, in order to have himself
portrayed in all his real ungainliness and ugliness, did not exist till
long after the time of the IVth and Vth Dynasties.

[Illustration: 100.jpg STATUE NO. 1 OF THE CAIRO MUSEUM, About 3900
B.C.]

The kings of the XIIth Dynasty especially were most careful that their
statues should be accurate portraits; indeed, the portraits of Usertsen
(Senusret) III vary from a young face to an old one, showing that the
king was faithfully depicted at different periods of his life.

But the general conventions of dress and deportment were finally fixed
under the Vth Dynasty. After this time we no longer have such absolutely
faithful and original presentments as the other little ivory statuette
found by Prof. Petrie at Abydos (now in the British Museum), which shows
us an aged monarch of the Ist Dynasty. It is obvious that the features
are absolutely true to life, and the figure wears an unconventionally
party-coloured and bordered robe of a kind which kings of a later day
may have worn in actual life, but which they would assuredly never be
depicted as wearing by the artists of their day. To the end of Egyptian
history, the kings, even the Roman emperors, were represented on the
monuments clothed in the official costume of their ancestors of the IVth
and Vth Dynasties, in the same manner as we see Khufu wearing his robe
in the little figure from Abydos, and Ne-user-Rà on the great
relief from Abusîr. There are one or two exceptions, such as the
representations of the original genius Akhunaten at Tell el-Amarna and
the beautiful statue of Ramses II at Turin, in which we see these kings
wearing the real costume of their time, but such exceptions are very
rare.

The art of Abusîr is therefore of great interest, since it marks the end
of the development of the priestly art. Secular art might develop as it
liked, though the crystallizing influence of the ecclesiastical canon is
always evident here also. But henceforward it was an impiety, which only
an Akhunaten could commit, to depict a king or a god on the walls of a
temple otherwise (except so far as, the portrait was concerned) than as
he had been depicted in the time of the Vth Dynasty.

Other buildings have been excavated by the Germans at Abusîr, notably
the usual town of mastaba-tombs belonging to the chief dignitaries of
the reign, which is always found at the foot of a royal pyramid of this
period. Another building of the highest interest, belonging to the same
age, was also excavated, and its true character was determined. This is
a building at a place called er-Rîgha or Abû Ghuraib, “Father of Crows,”
 between Abusîr and Gîza. It was formerly supposed to be a pyramid, but
the German excavations have shown that it is really a temple of the
Sun-god Râ of Heliopolis, specially venerated by the kings of the Vth
Dynasty, who were of Heliopolitan origin. The great pyramid-builders of
the IVth Dynasty seem to have been the last true Memphites. At the end
of the reign of Shepseskaf, the last monarch of the dynasty, the sceptre
passed to a Heliopolitan family. The following VIth Dynasty may again
have been Memphite, but this is uncertain. The capital continued to be
Memphis, and from the beginning of the Hid Dynasty to the end of the Old
Kingdom and the rise of Herakle-opolis and Thebes, Memphis remained the
chief city of Egypt.

The Heliopolitans were naturally the servants of the Sun-god above all
other gods, and they were the first to call themselves “Sons of the
Sun,” a title retained by the Pharaohs throughout all subsequent
history. It was Ne-user-Râ who built the Sun-temple of Abu Ghuraib,
on the edge of the desert, north of his pyramid and those of his two
immediate predecessors at Abusir. As now laid bare by the excavations of
1900, it is seen to consist of an artificial mound, with a great court
in front to the eastward. On the mound was erected a truncated obelisk,
the stone emblem of the Sun-god. The worshippers in the court below
looked towards the Sun’s stone erected upon its mound in the west,
the quarter of the sun’s setting; for the Sun-god of Heliopolis was
primarily the setting sun, Tum-Râ, not Râ Harmachis, the rising sun,
whose emblem is the Great Sphinx at Gîza, which looks towards the east.
The sacred emblem of the Heliopolitan Sun-god reminds us forcibly of the
Semitic _bethels_ or _baetyli_, the sacred stones of Palestine, and may
give yet another hint of the Semitic origin of the Heliopolitan cult.
In the court of the temple is a huge circular altar of fine alabaster,
several feet across, on which slain oxen were offered to the Sun, and
behind this, at the eastern end of the court, are six great basins of
the same stone, over which the beasts were slain, with drains running
out of them by which their blood was carried away. This temple is a most
interesting monument of the civilization of the “Old Kingdom” at the time
of the Vth Dynasty.

At Sakkâra itself, which lies a short distance south of Abusir, no new
royal tombs have, as has been said, been discovered of late years. But a
great deal of work has been done among the private mastaba-tombs by the
officers of the _Service des Antiquités_, which reserves to itself the
right of excavation here and at Dashûr. The mastaba of the sage and
writer Kagernna (or rather Gemnika, “I-have-found-a-ghost,” which
sounds very like an American Indian appellation) is very fine.
“I-have-found-a-ghost” lived in the reign of the king Tatkarâ Assa, the
“Tancheres” of Manetho, and he wrote maxims like his great contemporary
Phtahhetep (“Offered to Phtah”), who was also buried at Sakkâra. The
officials of the _Service des Antiquités_ who cleaned the tomb unluckily
misread his name Ka-bi-n (an impossible form which could only mean,
literally translated, “Ghost-soul-of” or “Ghost-soul-to-me”), and they
have placed it in this form over the entrance to his tomb. This mastaba,
like those, already known, of Mereruka (sometimes misnamed “Mera”)
and the famous Ti, both also at Sakkâra, contains a large number of
chambers, ornamented with reliefs. In the vicinity M. Grébaut, then
Director of the Service of Antiquities, discovered a very interesting
Street of Tombs, a regular Via Sacra, with rows of tombs of the
dignitaries of the VIth Dynasty on either side of it. They are generally
very much like one another; the workmanship of the reliefs is fine, and
the portrait of the owner of the tomb is always in evidence.

Several of the smaller mastabas have lately been disposed of to the
various museums, as they are liable to damage if they remain where they
stand; moreover, they are not of great value to the Museum of Cairo,
but are of considerable value to various museums which do not already
possess complete specimens of this class of tombs. A fine one, belonging
to the chief Uerarina, is now exhibited in the Assyrian Basement of the
British Museum; another is in the Museum of Leyden; a third at Berlin,
and so on. Most of these are simple tombs of one chamber. In the centre
of the rear wall we always see the _stele_ or gravestone proper,
built into the fabric of the tomb. Before this stood the low table
of offerings with a bowl for oblations, and on either side a tall
incense-altar. From the altar the divine smoke (_senetr_) arose when
the _hen-ka_, or priest of the ghost (literally, “Ghost’s Servant”),
performed his duty of venerating the spirits of the deceased, while the
_Kher-heb_, or cantor, enveloped in the mystic folds of the leopard-skin
and with bronze incense-burner in hand, sang the holy litanies and
spells which should propitiate the ghost and enable him to win his way
to ultimate perfection in the next world.

The stele is always in the form of a door with pyloni-form cornice. On
either side is a figure of the deceased, and at the sides are carved
prayers to Anubis, and at a later date to Osiris, who are implored to
give the funerary meats and “everything good and pure on which the god
there (as the dead man in the tomb has been constituted) lives;” often
we find that the biography and list of honorary titles and dignities of
the deceased have been added.

Sakkâra was used as a place of burial in the latest as well as in the
earliest time. The Egyptians of the XXVIth Dynasty, wearied of the long
decadence and devastating wars which had followed the glorious epoch of
the conquering Pharaohs of the XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties, turned for
a new and refreshing inspiration to the works of the most ancient kings,
when Egypt was a simple self-contained country, holding no intercourse
with outside lands, bearing no outside burdens for the sake of pomp and
glory, and knowing nothing of the decay and decadence which follows in
the train of earthly power and grandeur. They deliberately turned their
backs on the worn-out and discredited imperial trappings of the Thothmes
and Ramses, and they took the supposed primitive simplicity of the
Snefrus, the Khufus, and the Ne-user-Râs for a model and ensampler to
their lives. It was an age of conscious and intended archaism, and in
pursuit of the archaistic ideal the Mem-phites of the Saïte age had
themselves buried in the ancient necropolis of Sakkâra, side by side
with their ancestors of the time of the Vth and VIth Dynasties. Several
of these tombs have lately been discovered and opened, and fitted with
modern improvements. One or two of them, of the Persian period, have
wells (leading to the sepulchral chamber) of enormous depth, down which
the modern tourist is enabled to descend by a spiral iron staircase. The
Serapeum itself is lit with electricity, and in the Tombs of the Kings
at Thebes nothing disturbs the silence but the steady thumping pulsation
of the dynamo-engine which lights the ancient sepulchres of the
Pharaohs. Thus do modern ideas and inventions help us to see and so to
understand better the works of ancient Egypt. But it is perhaps a little
too much like the Yankee at the Court of King Arthur. The interiors of
the later tombs are often decorated with reliefs which imitate those of
the early period, but with a kind of delicate grace which at once marks
them for what they are, so that it is impossible to confound them with
the genuine ancient originals from which they were adapted.

Riding from Sakkâra southwards to Dashûr, we pass on the way the
gigantic stone mastaba known as the _Mastabat el-Fara’ûn_, “Pharaoh’s
Bench.” This was considered to be the tomb of the Vth Dynasty king,
Unas, until his pyramid was found by Prof. Maspero at Sakkâra. From its
form it might be thought to belong to a monarch of the Hid Dynasty, but
the great size of the stone blocks of which it is built seems to point
rather to the XIIth. All attempts to penetrate its secret by actual
excavation have been unavailing.

Further south across the desert we see from the Mastabat el-Fara’ûn
four distinct pyramids, symmetrically arranged in two lines, two in each
line. The two to the right are great stone erections of the usual
type, like those of Gîza and Abusîr, and the southernmost of them has a
peculiar broken-backed appearance, due to the alteration of the angle
of inclination of its sides during construction. Further, it is covered
almost to the ground by the original casing of polished white limestone
blocks, so that it gives a very good idea of the original appearance
of the other pyramids, which have lost their casing. These two
pyramids very probably belong to kings of the Hid Dynasty, as does the
Step-Pyramid of Sakkâra. They strongly resemble the Gîza type, and
the northernmost of the two looks very like an understudy of the Great
Pyramid. It seems to mark the step in the development of the royal
pyramid which was immediately followed by the Great Pyramid. But no
excavations have yet proved the accuracy of this view. Both pyramids
have been entered, but nothing has been found in them. It is very
probable that one of them is the second pyramid of Snefru.

The other two pyramids, those nearest the cultivation, are of very
different appearance. They are half-ruined, they are black in colour,
and their whole effect is quite different from that of the stone
pyramids. For they are built of brick, not of stone. They are pyramids,
it is true, but of a different material and of a different date from
those which we have been describing. They are built above the sepulchres
of kings of the XIIth Dynasty, the Theban house which transferred
its residence northwards to the neighbourhood of the ancient Northern
capital. We have, in fact, reached the end of the Old Kingdom at
Sakkâra; at Dashûr begin the sepulchres of the Middle Kingdom. Pyramids
are still built, but they are not always of stone; brick is used,
usually with stone in the interior. The general effect of these brick
pyramids, when new, must have been indistinguishable from that of the
stone ones, and even now, when it has become half-ruined, such a great
brick pyramid as that of Usertsen (Senusret) III at Dashûr is not
without impressiveness. After all, there is no reason why a brick
building should be less admirable than a stone one. And in its own way
the construction of such colossal masses of bricks as the two eastern
pyramids of Dashûr must have been as arduous, even as difficult, as that
of building a moderate-sized stone pyramid. The photograph of the brick
pyramids of Dashûr on this page shows well the great size of these
masses of brickwork, which are as impressive as any of the great brick
structures of Babylonia and Assyria.

[Illustration: 109.jpg EXTERIOR OF THE SOUTHERN BRICK PYRAMID OF DASHUR]

     XIITH DYNASTY. Excavated by M. de Morgan, 1895. This is the
     secondary tomb of Amenemhat III; about 2200 B.C.

The XIIth Dynasty use of brick for the royal tombs was a return to the
custom of earlier days, for from the time of Aha to that Tjeser, from
the 1st Dynasty to the Hid, brick had been used for the building of the
royal mastaba-tombs, out of which the pyramids had developed.

At this point, where we take leave of the great pyramids of the Old
Kingdom, we may notice the latest theory as to the building of these
monuments, which has of late years been enunciated by Dr. Borchardt, and
is now generally accepted. The great Prussian explorer Lepsius, when he
examined the pyramids in the ‘forties, came to the conclusion that each
king, when he ascended the throne, planned a small pyramid for himself.
This was built in a few years’ time, and if his reign were short, or if
he were unable to enlarge the pyramid for other reasons, it sufficed for
his tomb. If, however, his reign seemed likely to be one of some length,
after the first plan was completed he enlarged his pyramid by building
another and a larger one around it and over it. Then again, when this
addition was finished, and the king still reigned and was in possession
of great resources, yet another coating, so to speak, was put on to the
pyramid, and so on till colossal structures like the First and Second
Pyramid of Giza, which, we know, belonged to kings who were unusually
long-lived, were completed. And finally the aged monarch died, and was
buried in the huge tomb which his long life and his great power had
enabled him to erect. This view appeared eminently reasonable at the
time, and it seemed almost as though we ought to be able to tell whether
a king had reigned long or not by the size of his pyramid, and even
to obtain a rough idea of the length of his reign by counting the
successive coats or accretions which it had received, much as we tell
the age of a tree by the rings in its bole. A pyramid seemed to have
been constructed something after the manner of an onion or a Chinese
puzzle-box.

Prof. Pétrie, however, who examined the Griza pyramids in 1881, and
carefully measured them all up and finally settled their trigonometrical
relation, came to the conclusion that Lepsius’s theory was entirely
erroneous, and that every pyramid was built and now stands as it was
originally planned. Dr.

[Illustration: 111.jpg THE PYRAMIDS OF GIZA DURING THE INUNDATION.]

Borchardt, however, who is an architect by profession, has examined
the pyramids again, and has come to the conclusion that Prof. Pétrie’s
statement is not correct, and that there is an element of truth in
Lepsius’s hypothesis. He has shown that several of the pyramids, notably
the First and Second at Giza, show unmistakable signs of a modified,
altered, and enlarged plan; in fact, long-lived kings like Khufu seem
to have added considerably to their pyramids and even to have entirely
remodelled them on a larger scale. This has certainly been the case with
the Great Pyramid. We can, then, accept Lepsius’s theory as modified by
Dr. Borchardt.

Another interesting point has arisen in connection with the Great
Pyramid. Considerable difference of opinion has always existed between
Egyptologists and the professors of European archaeology with regard
to the antiquity of the knowledge of iron in Egypt. The majority of
the Egyptologists have always maintained, on the authority of the
inscriptions, that iron was known to the ancient Egyptians from the
earliest period. They argued that the word for a certain metal in old
Egyptian was the same as the Coptic word for “iron.” They stated that in
the most ancient religious texts the Egyptians spoke of the firmament
of heaven as made of this metal, and they came to the conclusion that it
was because this metal was blue in colour, the hue of iron or steel; and
they further pointed out that some of the weapons in the tomb-paintings
were painted blue and others red, some being of iron, that is to
say, others of copper or bronze. Finally they brought forward as
incontrovertible evidence an actual fragment of worked iron, which had
been found between two of the inner blocks, down one of the air-shafts,
in the Great Pyramid. Here was an actual piece of iron of the time of
the IVth Dynasty, about 3500 B.C.

This conclusion was never accepted by the students of the development of
the use of metal in prehistoric Europe, when they came to know of it.
No doubt their incredulity was partly due to want of appreciation of the
Egyptological evidence, partly to disinclination to accept a conclusion
which did not at all agree with the knowledge they had derived from
their own study of prehistoric Europe. In Southern Europe it was quite
certain that iron did not come into use till about 1000 B.C.; in Central
Europe, where the discoveries at Hallstatt in the Salzkammergut exhibit
the transition from the Age of Bronze to that of Iron, about 800 B.C.
The exclusively Iron Age culture of La Tène cannot be dated earlier than
the eighth century, if as early as that. How then was it possible that,
if iron had been known to the Egyptians as early as 3500 B.C., its
knowledge should not have been communicated to the Europeans until over
two thousand years later? No; iron could not have been really known to
the Egyptians much before 1000 B.C. and the Egyptological evidence was
all wrong. This line of argument was taken by the distinguished
Swedish archaeologist, Prof. Oscar Montelius, of Upsala, whose previous
experience in dealing with the antiquities of Northern Europe, great as
it was, was hardly sufficient to enable him to pronounce with authority
on a point affecting far-away African Egypt. And when dealing with Greek
prehistoric antiquities Prof. Montelius’s views have hardly met with
that ready agreement which all acknowledge to be his due when he is
giving us the results of his ripe knowledge of Northern antiquities. He
has, in fact, forgotten, as most “prehistoric” archaeologists do forget,
that the antiquities of Scandinavia, Greece, Egypt, the Semites,
the bronze-workers of Benin, the miners of Zimbabwe, and the Ohio
mound-builders are not to be treated all together as a whole, and that
hard and fast lines of development cannot be laid down for them, based
on the experience of Scandinavia.

We may perhaps trace this misleading habit of thought to the influence
of the professors of natural science over the students of Stone Age and
Bronze Age antiquities. Because nature moves by steady progression and
develops on even lines--_nihil facit per sal-tum_--it seems to have been
assumed that the works of man’s hands have developed in the same way,
in a regular and even scheme all over the world. On this supposition it
would be impossible for the great discovery of the use of iron to have
been known in Egypt as early as 3500 B.C. for this knowledge to have
remained dormant there for two thousand years, and then to have
been suddenly communicated about 1000 B.C. to Greece, spreading with
lightning-like rapidity over Europe and displacing the use of bronze
everywhere. Yet, as a matter of fact, the work of man does develop
in exactly this haphazard way, by fits and starts and sudden leaps of
progress after millennia of stagnation. Throwsback to barbarism are just
as frequent. The analogy of natural evolution is completely inapplicable
and misleading.

Prof. Montelius, however, following the “evolutionary” line of thought,
believed that because iron was not known in Europe till about 1000 B.C.
it could not have been known in Egypt much earlier; and in an important
article which appeared in the Swedish ethnological journal _Ymer_ in
1883, entitled _Bronsaldrn i Egypten_ (“The Bronze Age in Egypt”), he
essayed to prove the contrary arguments of the Egyptologists wrong. His
main points were that the colour of the weapons in the frescoes was of
no importance, as it was purely conventional and arbitrary, and that the
evidence of the piece of iron from the Great Pyramid was insufficiently
authenticated, and therefore valueless, in the absence of other definite
archaeological evidence in the shape of iron of supposed early date. To
this article the Swedish Egyptologist, Dr. Piehl, replied in the same
periodical, in an article entitled _Bronsaldem i Egypten_, in which he
traversed Prof. Montelius’s conclusions from the Egyptological point of
view, and adduced other instances of the use of iron in Egypt, all,
it is true, later than the time of the IVth Dynasty. But this protest
received little notice, owing to the fact that it remained buried in
a Swedish periodical, while Prof. Montelius’s original article was
translated into French, and so became well-known.

For the time Prof. Montelius’s conclusions were generally accepted, and
when the discoveries of the prehistoric antiquities were made by M. de
Morgan, it seemed more probable than ever that Egypt had gone through a
regular progressive development from the Age of Stone through those of
copper and bronze to that of iron, which was reached about 1100 or 1000
B.C. The evidence of the iron fragment from the Great Pyramid was put on
one side, in spite of the circumstantial account of its discovery
which had been given by its finders. Even Prof. Pétrie, who in 1881
had accepted the pyramid fragment as undoubtedly contemporary with that
building, and had gone so far as to adduce additional evidence for its
authenticity, gave way, and accepted Montelius’s view, which held its
own until in 1902 it was directly controverted by a discovery of Prof.
Pétrie at Abydos. This discovery consisted of an undoubted fragment of
iron found in conjunction with bronze tools of VIth Dynasty date; and it
settled the matter.* The VIth Dynasty date of this piece of iron, which
was more probably worked than not (since it was buried with tools), was
held to be undoubted by its discoverer and by everybody else, and, if
this were undoubted, the IVth Dynasty date of the Great Pyramid fragment
was also fully established. The discoverers of the earlier fragment had
no doubt whatever as to its being contemporary with the pyramid, and
were supported in this by Prof. Pétrie in 1881. Therefore it is now
known to be the fact that iron was used by the Egyptians as early as
3500 B.C.**

     * See H. R. Hall’s note on “The Early Use of Iron in Egypt,”
      in _Man_ (the organ of the Anthropological Society of
     London), iii (1903), No. 86.

     ** Prof. Montelius objected to these conclusions in a review
     of the British Museum “Guide to the Antiquities of the
     Bronze Age,” which was published in Man, 1005 (Jan.), No 7.
     For an answer to these objections, see Hall, ibid., No. 40.

It would thus appear that though the Egyptians cannot be said to have
used iron generally and so to have entered the “Iron Age” before about
1300 B.C. (reign of Ramses II), yet iron was well known to them and had
been used more than occasionally by them for tools and building purposes
as early as the time of the IVth Dynasty, about 3500 B.C. Certainly
dated examples of its use occur under the IVth, VIth, and XIIIth
Dynasties. Why this knowledge was not communicated to Europe before
about 1000 B.C. we cannot say, nor are Egyptologists called upon to find
the reason. So the Great Pyramid has played an interesting part in the
settlement of a very important question.

It was supposed by Prof. Pétrie that the piece of iron from the Great
Pyramid had been part of some arrangement employed for raising the
stones into position. Herodotus speaks of the machines, which were used
to raise the stones, as made of little pieces of wood. The generally
accepted explanation of his meaning used to be that a small crane or
similar wooden machine was used for hoisting the stone by means
of pulley and rope; but M. Legrain, the director of the works of
restoration in the Great Temple of Karnak, has explained it differently.
Among the “foundation deposits” of the XVIIIth Dynasty at Dêr el-Bahari
and elsewhere, beside the little plaques with the king’s name and the
model hoes and vases, was usually found an enigmatic wooden object like
a small cradle, with two sides made of semicircular pieces of wood,
joined along the curved portion by round wooden bars. M. Legrain has now
explained this as a model of the machine used to raise heavy stones from
tier to tier of a pyramid or other building, and illustrations of
the method of its use may be found in Choisy’s _Art de Bâtir chez les
anciens Egyptiens_. There is little doubt that this primitive machine
is that to which Herodotus refers as having been used in the erection of
the pyramids.

The later historian, Diodorus, also tells us that great mounds or ramps
of earth were used as well, and that the stones were dragged up these
to the requisite height. There is no doubt that this statement also is
correct. We know that the Egyptians did build in this very way, and
the system has been revived by M. Legrain for his work at Karnak, where
still exist the remains of the actual mounds and ramps by which the
great western pylon was erected in Ptolemaïc times. Work carried on
in this way is slow and expensive, but it is eminently suited to the
country and understood by the people. If they wish to put a great stone
architrave weighing many tons across the top of two columns, they do not
hoist it up into position; they rear a great ramp or embankment of earth
against the two pillars, half-burying them in the process, then drag
the architrave up the ramp by means of ropes and men, and put it into
position. Then the ramp is cleared away. This is the ancient system
which is now followed at Karnak, and it is the system by which, with the
further aid of the wooden machines, the Great Pyramid and its compeers
were erected in the days of the IVth Dynasty. _Plus cela change, plus
c’est la même chose_.

The brick pyramids of the XIIth Dynasty were erected in the same way,
for the Egyptians had no knowledge of the modern combination of wooden
scaffolding and ladders. There was originally a small stone pyramid of
the same dynasty at Dashûr, half-way between the two brick ones, but
this has now almost disappeared. It belonged to the king Amenemhat II,
while the others belonged, the northern to Usertsen (Sen-usret) III, the
southern to Amenemhat III. Both these latter monarchs had other tombs
elsewhere, Usertsen a great rock-cut gallery and chamber in the cliff at
Abydos, Amenemhat a pyramid not very far to the south, at Hawara, close
to the Fayyûm. It is uncertain whether the Hawara pyramid or that of
Dashûr was the real burial-place of the king, as at neither place is his
name found alone. At Hawara it is found in conjunction with that of his
daughter, the queen-regnant Se-bekneferurâ (Skemiophris), at Dashûr with
that of a king Auabrâ Hor, who was buried in a small tomb near that of
the king, and adjoining the tombs of the king’s children. Who King Hor
was we do not quite know. His name is not given in the lists, and was
unknown until M. de Morgan’s discoveries at Dashûr. It is most probable
that he was a prince who was given royal honours during the lifetime of
Amenemhat III, whom he predeceased.* In the beautiful wooden statue
of him found in his tomb, which is now in the Cairo Museum, he is
represented as quite a youth. Amenemhat III was certainly succeeded by
Amenemhat IV, and it is impossible to intercalate Hor between them.

     * See below, p. 121. Possibly he was a son of Amenemhat III.

The identification of the owners of the three western pyramids of Dashûr
is due to M. de Morgan and his assistants, Messrs. Legrain and Jéquier,
who excavated them from 1894 till 1896. The northern pyramid, that of
Usertsen (Senusret) III, is not so well preserved as the southern. It is
more worn away, and does not present so imposing an appearance. In
both pyramids the outer casing of white stone has entirely disappeared,
leaving only the bare black bricks. Each stood in the midst of a great
necropolis of dignitaries of the period, as was usually the case.
Many of the mastabas were excavated by M. de Morgan. Some are of older
periods than the XIIth Dynasty, one belonging to a priest of King
Snefru, Aha-f-ka (“Ghost-fighter”), who bore the additional titles of
“director of prophets and general of infantry.” There were pluralists
even in those days. And the distinction between the privy councillor
(Geheimrat) and real privy councillor (Wirk-licher-Greheimrat) was quite
familiar; for we find it actually made, many an old Egyptian officially
priding himself in his tomb on having been a real privy councillor! The
Egyptian bureaucracy was already ancient and had its survivals and its
anomalies even as early as the time of the pyramid-builders.

In front of the pyramid of Usertsen (Senusret) III at one time stood the
usual funerary temple, but it has been totally destroyed. By the side of
the pyramid were buried some of the princesses of the royal family, in
a series of tombs opening out of a subterranean gallery, and in this
gallery were found the wonderful jewels of the princesses Sit-hathor and
Merit, which are among the greatest treasures of the Cairo Museum. Those
who have not seen them can obtain a perfect idea of their appearance
from the beautiful water-colour paintings of them by M. Legrain, which
are published in M. de Morgan’s work on the “Fouilles à Dahchour”
 (Vienna, 1895). Altogether one hundred and seven objects were recovered,
consisting of all kinds of jewelry in gold and coloured stones. Among
the most beautiful are the great “pectorals,” or breast-ornaments, in
the shape of pylons, with the names of Usertsen II, Usertsen III, and
Amenemhat III; the names are surrounded by hawks standing on the sign
for gold, gryphons, figures of the king striking down enemies, etc., all
in _cloisonné_ work, with beautiful stones such as lapis lazuli, green
felspar, and carnelian taking the place of coloured enamels. The massive
chains of golden beads and cowries are also very remarkable. These
treasures had been buried in boxes in the floor of the subterranean
gallery, and had luckily escaped the notice of plunderers, and so by a
fortunate chance have survived to tell us what the Egyptian jewellers
could do in the days of the XIIth Dynasty. Here also were found two
great Nile barges, full-sized boats, with their oars and other gear
complete. They also may be seen in the Museum of Cairo. It can only be
supposed that they had served as the biers of the royal mummies, and had
been brought up in state on sledges. The actual royal chamber was not
found, although a subterranean gallery was driven beneath the centre of
the pyramid.

The southern brick pyramid was constructed in the same way as the
northern one. At the side of it were also found the tombs of members of
the royal house, including that of the king Hor, already mentioned, with
its interesting contents. The remains of the mummy of this ephemeral
monarch, known only from his tomb, were also found. The entrails of the
king were placed in the usual “canopic jars,” which were sealed with the
seal of Amenemhat III; it is thus that we know that Hor died before him.
In many of the inscriptions of this king, on his coffin and stelo, a
peculiarly affected manner of writing the hieroglyphs is found,--the
birds are without their legs, the snake has no tail, the bee no head.
Birds are found without their legs in other inscriptions of this period;
it was a temporary fashion and soon discarded.

In the tomb of a princess named Nubhetep, near at hand, were found more
jewels of the same style as those of Sit-hathor and Merit. The pyramid
itself contained the usual passages and chambers, which were reached
with much difficulty and considerable tunnelling by M. de Morgan. In
fact, the search for the royal death-chambers lasted from December 5,
1894, till March 17, 1895, when the excavators’ gallery finally struck
one of the ancient passages, which were found to be unusually extensive,
contrasting in this respect with the northern pyramid. The royal
tomb-chamber had, of course, been emptied of what it contained. It must
be remembered that, in any case, it is probable that the king was not
actually buried here, but in the pyramid of Hawara.

The pyramid of Amenemhat II, which lies between the two brick pyramids,
was built entirely of stone. Nothing of it remains above ground, but the
investigation of the subterranean portions showed that it was remarkable
for the massiveness of its stones and the care with which the masonry
was executed. The same characteristics are found in the dependent tombs
of the princesses Ha and Khnumet, in which more jewelry was found. This
splendid stonework is characteristic of the Middle Kingdom; we find it
also in the temple of Mentuhetep III at Thebes.

Some distance south of Dashûr is Mêdûm, where the pyramid of Sneferu
reigns in solitude, and beyond this again is Lisht, where in the
years 1894-6 MM. Gautier and Jéquier excavated the pyramid of Usertsen
(Sen-usret) I. The most remarkable find was a cache of the seated
statues of the king in white limestone, in absolutely perfect condition.
They were found lying on their sides, just as they had been hidden. Six
figures of the king in the form of Osiris, with the face painted red,
were also found. Such figures seem to have been regularly set up in
front of a royal sepulchre; several were found in front of the funerary
temple of Mentu-hetep III, Thebes, which we shall describe later. A
fine altar of gray granite, with representations in relief of the nomes
bringing offerings, was also recovered. The pyramid of Lisht itself is
not built of bricks, like those of Dashûr, but of stone. It was not,
however, erected in so solid a fashion as those of earlier days at Gîza
or Abusîr, and nothing is left of it now but a heap of débris. The XIIth
Dynasty architects built walls of magnificent masonry, as we have
seen, and there is no doubt that the stone casing of their pyramids
was originally very fine, but the interior is of brick or rubble; the
wonderful system of building employed by kings of the IVth Dynasty at
Giza was not practised.

South of Lisht is Illahun, and at the entrance to the province of the
Fayyûm, and west of this, nearer the Fayyûm, is Hawara, where Prof.
Petrie excavated the pyramids of Usertsen (Senusret) II and Amenem-hat
III. His discoveries have already been described by Prof. Maspero in his
history, so that it will suffice here merely to compare them with the
results of M. de Morgan’s later work at Dashûr and that of MM. Gautier
and Jéquier at Lisht, to note recent conclusions in connection with
them, and to describe the newest discoveries in the same region.

Both pyramids are of brick, lined with stone, like those of Dashûr, with
some differences of internal construction, since stone walls exist in
the interior. The central chambers and passages leading to them were
discovered; and in both cases the passages are peculiarly complex, with
dumb chambers, great stone portcullises, etc., in order to mislead
and block the way to possible plunderers. The extraordinary sepulchral
chamber of the Hawara pyramid, which, though it is over twenty-two feet
long by ten feet wide over all, is hewn out of one solid block of hard
yellow quartzite, gives some idea of the remarkable facility of dealing
with huge stones and the love of utilizing them which is especially
characteristic of the XIIth Dynasty. The pyramid of Hawara was provided
with a funerary temple the like of which had never been known in Egypt
before and was never known afterwards. It was a huge building far larger
than the pyramid itself, and built of fine limestone and crystalline
white quartzite, in a style eminently characteristic of the XIIth
Dynasty. In actual superficies this temple covered an extent of ground
within which the temples of Karnak, Luxor, and the Ramesseum, at Thebes,
could have stood, but has now almost entirely disappeared, having been
used as a quarry for two thousand years. In Roman times this destroying
process had already begun, but even then the building was still
magnificent, and had been noted with wonder by all the Greek visitors to
Egypt from the time of Herodotus downwards. Even before his day it
had received the name of the “Labyrinth,” on account of its supposed
resemblance to the original labyrinth in Crete.

That the Hawara temple was the Egyptian labyrinth was pointed out by
Lepsius in the ‘forties of the last century. Within the last two or
three years attention has again been drawn to it by Mr. Arthur Evans’s
discovery of the Cretan labyrinth itself in the shape of the Minoan
or early Mycenæan palace of Knossos, near Candia in Crete. It is
impossible to enter here into all the arguments by which it has been
proved that the Knossian palace is the veritable labyrinth of the
Minotaur legend, nor would it be strictly germane to our subject were we
to do so; but it may suffice to say here that the word

[Illustration: 125.jpg (Greek word)]

has been proved to be of Greek-or rather of pre-Hellenic-origin, and
would mean in Karian “Place of the Double-Axe,” like La-braunda in
Karia, where Zeus was depicted with a double axe (labrys) in his hand.
The non-Aryan, “Asianic,” group of languages, to which certainly Lycian
and probably Karian belong, has been shown by the German philologer
Kretschmer to have spread over Greece into Italy in the period before
the Aryan Greeks entered Hellas, and to have left undoubted traces of
its presence in Greek place-names and in the Greek language itself.
Before the true Hellenes reached Crete, an Asianic dialect must have
been spoken there, and to this language the word “labyrinth” must
originally have belonged. The classical labyrinth was “in the Knossian
territory.” The palace of Knossos was emphatically the chief seat of the
worship of a god whose emblem was the double-axe; it was the Knossian
“Place of the Double-Axe,” the Cretan “Labyrinth.”

It used to be supposed that the Cretan labyrinth had taken its name from
the Egyptian one, and the, word itself was supposed to be of Egyptian
origin. An Egyptian etymology was found for it as “_Ro-pi-ro-henet_,”
 “Temple-mouth-canal,” which might be interpreted, with some violence to
Egyptian construction, as “The temple at the mouth of the canal,” i.e.
the Bahr Yusuf, which enters the Fayyûm at Hawara. But unluckily this
word would have been pronounced by the natives of the vicinity as
“Elphilahune,” which is not very much like

[Illustration: 126.jpg (Greek word)]

“_Ro-pi-ro-henet_” is, in fact, a mere figment of the philological
imagination, and cannot be proved ever to have existed. The element
_Ro-henet_, “canal-mouth” (according to the local pronunciation of the
Fayyûm and Middle Egypt, called _La-hunè_), is genuine; it is the
origin of the modern Illahun (_el-Lahun_), which is situated at the
“canal-mouth.” However, now that we know that the word labyrinth can be
explained satisfactorily with the help of Karian, as evidently of Greek
(pre-Aryan) origin, and as evidently the original name of the Knossian
labyrinth, it is obvious that there is no need to seek a far-fetched
explanation of the word in Egypt, and to suppose that the Greeks called
the Cretan labyrinth after the Egyptian one.

The contrary is evidently the case. Greek visitors to Egypt found a
resemblance between the great Egyptian building, with its numerous halls
and corridors, vast in extent, and the Knossian palace. Even if very
little of the latter was visible in the classical period, as seems
possible, yet the site seems always to have been kept holy and free from
later building till Roman times, and we know that the tradition of the
mazy halls and corridors of the labyrinth was always clear, and was
evidently based on a vivid reminiscence. Actually, one of the most
prominent characteristics of the Knossian palace is its mazy and
labyrinthine system of passages and chambers. The parallel between the
two buildings, which originally caused the Greek visitors to give the
pyramid-temple of Hawara the name of “labyrinth,” has been traced still
further. The white limestone walls and the shining portals of “Parian
marble,” described by Strabo as characteristic of the Egyptian
labyrinth, have been compared with the shining white selenite or gypsum
used at Knossos, and certain general resemblances between the Greek
architecture of the Minoan age and the almost contemporary Egyptian
architecture of the XIIth Dynasty have been pointed out.* Such
resemblances may go to swell the amount of evidence already known, which
tells us that there was a close connection between Egyptian and Minoan
art and civilization, established at least as early as 2500 B.C.

     * See H. R. Hall, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 1905 (Pt.
     ii). The Temple of the Sphinx at Gîza may also be compared
     with those of Hawara and Knossos. It seems most probable
     that the Temple of the Sphinx is a XIIth Dynasty building.

For it must be remembered that within the last few years we have learned
from the excavations in Crete a new chapter of ancient history, which,
it might almost seem, shows us Greece and Egypt in regular communication
from nearly the beginnings of Egyptian history. As the excavations which
have told us this were carried on in Crete, not in Egypt, to describe
them does not lie within the scope of this book, though a short sketch
of their results, so far as they affect Egyptian history in later days,
is given in Chapter VII. Here it may suffice to say that, as far as
the early period is concerned, Egypt and Crete were certainly in
communication in the time of the XIIth Dynasty, and quite possibly in
that of the VIth or still earlier. We have IIId Dynasty Egyptian vases
from Knossos, which were certainly not imported in later days, for no
ancient nation had antiquarian tastes till the time of the Saïtes in
Egypt and of the Romans still later. In fact, this communication seems
to go so far back in time that we are gradually being led to perceive
the possibility that the Minoan culture of Greece was in its origin an
offshoot from that of primeval Egypt, probably in early Neolithic times.
That is to say, the Neolithic Greeks and Neolithic Egyptians were both
members of the same “Mediterranean” stock, which quite possibly may have
had its origin in Africa, and a portion of which may have crossed the
sea to Europe in very early times, taking with it the seeds of culture
which in Egypt developed in the Egyptian way, in Greece in the Greek
way. Actual communication and connection may not have been maintained
at first, and probably they were not. Prof. Petrie thinks otherwise, and
would see in the boats painted on the predynastic Egyptian vases (see
Chapter I) the identical galleys by which, in late Neolithic
times, commerce between Crete and Egypt was carried on across the
Mediterranean. It is certain, however, that these boats are ordinary
little river craft, the usual Nile _felûkas_ and _gyassas_ of the time;
they are depicted together with emblems of the desert and cultivated
land,-ostriches, antelopes, hills, and palm-trees,-and the thoroughly
inland and Upper Egyptian character of the whole design springs to the
eye. There can be no doubt whatever that the predynastic boats were not
seagoing galleys.

It was probably not till the time of the pyramid-builders that
connection between the Greek Mediterraneans and the Nilotes was
re-established. Thence-forward it increased, and in the time of the
XIIth Dynasty, when the labyrinth of Amenemhat III was built, there
seems to have been some kind of more or less regular communication
between the two countries.

It is certain that artistic ideas were exchanged between them at this
period. How communication was carried on we do not know, but it was
probably rather by way of Cyprus and the Syrian coast than directly
across the open sea. We shall revert to this point when we come to
describe the connection between Crete and Egypt in the time of the
XVIIIth Dynasty, when Cretan ambassadors visited the Egyptian court and
were depicted in tomb paintings at Thebes. Between the time of the XIIth
Dynasty and that of the XVIIIth this connection seems to have been very
considerably strengthened; for at Knossos have been found an Egyptian
statuette of an Egyptian named Abnub, who from his name must have lived
about the end of the XIIIth Dynasty, and the top of an alabastron with
the royal name of Khian, one of the Hyksos kings.

Quite close to Hawara, at Illahun, in the ruins of the town which was
built by Usertsen’s workmen when they were building his pyramid, Prof.
Petrie found fragments of pottery of types which we now know well from
excavations in Crete and Cyprus, though they were then unknown. They are
fragments of the polychrome Cretan ware called, after the name of the
place where it was first found in Crete, Kamares ware, and of a black
ware ornamented with small punctures, which are often filled up with
white. This latter ware has been found elsewhere associated with XIIIth
Dynasty antiquities. The former is known to belong in Crete to the
“early Minoan” period, long anterior to the “late Minoan” or “Palace”
 period, which was contemporary with the Egyptian XVIIIth Dynasty.
We have here another interesting proof of a connection between XIIth
Dynasty Egypt and early Minoan Crete. The later connection, under the
XVIIIth and following dynasties, is also illustrated in the same reign
by Prof. Petrie’s finds of late Mycenaean objects and foreign graves at
Medinet Gurob.*

     * One man who was buried here bore the name An-Tursha,
     “Pillar of the Tursha.” The Tursha were a people of the
     Mediterranean, possibly Tylissians of Crete.

These excavations at Hawara, Illahun, Kahun, and Gurob were carried out
in the years 1887-9. Since then Prof. Petrie and his co-workers have
revisited the same district, and Gurob has been re-examined (in 1904)
by Messrs. Loat and Ayrton, who discovered there a shrine devoted to
the worship of fish. This work was carried on at the same time as Prof.
Petrie’s main excavation for the Egypt Exploration Fund at Annas, or
Ahnas-yet el-Medina, the site of the ancient Henensu, the Herakleopolis
of the Greeks. Prof. Naville had excavated there for the Egypt
Exploration Fund in 1892, but had not completely cleared the temple.
This work was now taken up by Prof. Petrie, who laid the whole building
bare. It is dedicated to Hershefi, the local deity of Herakleopolis.
This god, who was called Ar-saphes by the Greeks, and identified with
Herakles, was in fact a form of Horus with the head of a ram; his name
means “Terrible-Face.” The greater part of the temple dates to the time
of the XIXth Dynasty, and nothing of the early period is left. We know,
however, that the Middle Kingdom was the flourishing period of the
city of Hershefi. For a comparatively brief period, between the age of
Memphite hegemony and that of Theban dominion, Herakleopolis was the
capital city of Egypt. The kings of the IXth and Xth Dynasties were
Herakleopolites, though we know little of them. One, Kheti, is said to
have been a great tyrant. Another, Nebkaurâ, is known only as a figure
in the “Legend of the Eloquent Peasant,” a classical story much in vogue
in later days. Another, Merikarâ, is a more real personage, for we have
contemporary records of his days in the inscriptions of the tombs at
Asyût, from which we see that the princes of Thebes were already wearing
down the Northerners, in spite of the resistance of the adherents of
Herakleopolis, among whom the most valiant were the chiefs of Asyût. The
civil war eventuated in favour of Thebes, and the Theban XIth Dynasty
assumed the double crown. The sceptre passed from Memphis and the North,
and Thebes enters upon the scene of Egyptian history.

With this event the Nile-land also entered upon a new era of
development. The metropolis of the kingdom was once more shifted to the
South, and, although the kings of the XIIth Dynasty actually resided
in the North, their Theban origin was never forgotten, and Thebes
was regarded as the chief city of the country. The XIth Dynasty kings
actually reigned at Thebes, and there the later kings of the XIIIth
Dynasty retired after the conquest of the Hyksos. The fact that with
Thebes were associated all the heroic traditions of the struggle against
the Hyksos ensured the final stability of the capital there when the
hated Semites were finally driven out, and the national kingdom
was re-established in its full extent from north to south. But for
occasional intervals, as when Akhunaten held his court at Tell el-Amarna
and Ramses II at Tanis, Thebes remained the national capital for six
hundred years, till the time of the XXIId Dynasty.

Another great change which differentiates the Middle Kingdom
(XIth-XIIIth Dynasties) from the Old Kingdom was caused by Egypt’s
coming into contact with other outside nations at this period. During
the whole history of the Old Kingdom, Egyptian relations with the outer
world had been nil. We have some inkling of occasional connection
with the Mediterranean peoples, the _Ha-nebu_ or Northerners; we have
accounts of wars with the people of Sinai and other Bedawin and negroes;
and expeditions were also sent to the land of Punt (Somaliland) by way
of the Upper Nile. But we have not the slightest hint of any connection
with, or even knowledge of, the great nations of the Euphrates valley
or the peoples of Palestine. The Babylonian king Narâm-Sin invaded the
Sinaitic peninsula (the land of Magan) as early as 3750 b. c, about
the time of the IIId Egyptian Dynasty. The great King Tjeser, of that
dynasty, also invaded Sinai, and so did Snefru, the last king of the
dynasty. But we have no hint of any collision between Babylonians and
Egyptians at that time, nor do either of them betray the slightest
knowledge of one another’s existence. It can hardly be that the two
civilized peoples of the world in those days were really absolutely
ignorant of each other, but we have no trace of any connection between
them, other than the possible one before the founding of the Egyptian
monarchy.

This early connection, however, is very problematical. We have seen that
there seems to be in early Egyptian civilization an element ultimately
of Babylonian origin, and that there are two theories as to how it
reached Egypt. One supposes that it was brought by a Semitic people of
Arab affinities (represented by the modern Grallas), who crossed the
Straits of Bab el-Man-deb and reached Egypt either by way of the Wadi
Hammamat or by the Upper Nile. The other would bring it across the
Isthmus of Suez to the Delta, where, at Heliopolis, there certainly
seems to have been a settlement of a Semitic type of very ancient
culture. In both cases we should have Semites bringing Babylonian
culture to Egypt. This, as we may remind the reader, was not itself of
Semitic origin, but was a development due to a non-Semitic people,
the Sumerians as they are called, who, so far as we know, were the
aboriginal inhabitants of Babylonia. The Sumerian language was of
agglutinative type, radically distinct both from the pure Semitic idioms
and from Egyptian. The Babylonian elements of culture which the early
Semitic invaders brought with them to Egypt were, then, ultimately of
Sumerian origin. Sumerian civilization had profoundly influenced the
Semitic tribes for centuries before the Semitic conquest of Babylonia,
and when the Sumerians became more and more a conquered race, finally
amalgamating with their conquerors and losing their racial and
linguistic individuality, they were conquered by an alien race but not
by an alien culture. For the culture of the Semites was Sumerian, the
Semitic races owing their civilization to the Sumerians. That is as
much as to say that a great deal of what we call Semitic culture is
fundamentally non-Semitic.

In the earliest days, then, Egypt received elements of Sumerian culture
through a Semitic medium, which introduced Semitic elements into the
language of the people, and a Semitic racial strain. It is possible.
that both theories as to the routes of these primeval conquerors are
true, and that two waves of Semites entered the Nile valley towards
the close of the Neolithic period, one by way of the Upper Nile or Wadi
Hammamat, the other by way of Heliopolis.

After the reconsolidation of the Egyptian people, with perhaps an
autocratic class of Semitic origin and a populace of indigenous Nilotic
race, we have no trace of further connection with the far-away centre of
Semitic culture in Babylonia till the time of the Theban hegemony.
Under the XIIth Dynasty we see Egyptians in friendly relations with the
Bedawin of Idumsea and Southern Palestine. Thus Sanehat, the younger son
of Amenemhat I, when the death of his royal father was announced, fled
from the new king Usertsen (Senusret) into Palestine, and there married
the daughter of the chief Ammuanshi and became a Syrian chief himself,
only finally returning to Egypt as an old man on the assurance of the
royal pardon and favour. We have in the reign of Usertsen (Senusret) II
the famous visit of the Arab chief Abisha (Abêshu’) with his following
to the court of Khnumhetep, the prince of the Oryx nome in Middle Egypt,
as we see it depicted on the walls of Khnumhetep’s tomb at Beni Hasan.
We see Usertsen (Senusret) III invading Palestine to chastise the land
of Sekmem and the vile Syrians.*

     * We know of this campaign from the interesting historical
     stele of the general Sebek-khu (who took part in it), which
     was found during Mr. Garstang’s excavations at Abydos, not
     previously referred to above. They were carried out in 1900,
     and resulted in the complete clearance of a part of the
     great cemetery which had been created during the XIIth
     Dynasty. The group of objects from the tombs of this
     cemetery, and those of XVIIIth Dynasty tombs also found, is
     especially valuable as showing the styles of objects in use
     at these two periods (see Garstang, el-Ardbah, 1901).

The arm of Egypt was growing longer, and its weight was being felt in
regions where it had previously been entirely unknown. Eventually the
collision came. Egypt collided with an Asiatic power, and got the worst
of the encounter. So much the worse that the Theban monarchy of the
Middle Kingdom was overthrown, and Northern Egypt was actually conquered
by the Asiatic foreigners and ruled by a foreign house for several
centuries. Who these conquering Hyksos, or Shepherd Kings, were no
recent discovery has told us. An old idea was that they were Mongols. It
was supposed that the remarkable faces of the sphinxes of Tanis, now
in the Cairo Museum, which bore the names of Hyksos kings, were of
Mongolian type, as also those of two colossal royal heads discovered
by M. Naville at Bubastis. But M. Golénischeff has now shown that these
heads are really those of XIIth Dynasty kings, and not of Hyksos at all.
Messrs. Newberry and Garstang have lately endeavoured to show that this
type was foreign, and probably connected with that of the Kheta, or
Hittites, of Northern Syria, who came into prominence as enemies of
Egypt at a later period. They think that the type was introduced into
the Egyptian royal family by Nefret, the queen of Usertsen (Senusret)
II, whom they suppose to have been a Hittite princess. At the same time
they think it probable that the type was also that of the Hyksos, whom
they consider to have been practically Hittites. They therefore revive
the theory of de Cara, which connects the Hyksos with the Hittites and
these with the Pelasgi and Tyrseni.

This is a very interesting theory, which, when carried out to its
logical conclusion, would connect the Hyksos and Hittites racially with
the pre-Hellenic “Minoan” Mycenseans of Greece, as well as with the
Etruscans of Italy. But there is little of certainty in it. It is by no
means impossible that we may eventually come to know that the Hittites
(_Kheta_, the _Khatte_ of the Assyrians) and other tribes of Asia
Minor were racially akin to the “Minoans” of Greece, but the connection
between the Hyksos and the Hittites is to seek. The countenances of the
Kheta on the Egyptian monuments of Ramses II’s time have an angular
cast, and so have those of the Tanis sphinxes, of Queen Nefret, of
the Bubastis statues, and the statues of Usertsen (Senusret) III
and Amenemhat III. We might then suppose, with Messrs. Newberry and
Garstang, that Nefret was a Kheta princess, who gave her peculiar racial
traits to her son Usertsen (Senusret) III and his son Amenem-hat, were
it not far more probable that the resemblance between this peculiar
XIIth Dynasty type and the Kheta face is purely fortuitous.

There is really no reason to suppose that the type of face presented by
Nefret, Usertsen, and Amenemhat is not purely Egyptian. It may be seen
in many a modern fellah, and the truth probably is that the sculptors
have in the case of these rulers very faithfully and carefully depicted
their portraits, and that their faces happen to have been of a rather
hard and forbidding type. But, if we grant the contention of Messrs.
Newberry and Garstang for the moment, where is the connection between
these XIIth Dynasty kings and the Hyksos? All the Tanite monuments with
this peculiar facial type which would be considered Hyksos are certainly
of the XIIth Dynasty. The only statue of a Hyksos king, which was
undoubtedly originally made for him and is not one of the XIIth Dynasty
usurped, is the small one of Khian at Cairo, discovered by M. Naville at
Bubastis, and this has no head. So that we have not the slightest idea
of what a Hyksos looked like. Moreover, the evidence of the Hyksos names
which are known to us points in quite a different direction. The Kheta,
or Hittites, were certainly not Semites, yet the Hyksos names are
definitely Semitic. In fact it is most probable that the Hyksos, or
Shepherd Kings, were, as the classical authorities say they were, and as
their name (_hiku-semut_ or _hihu-shasu_,) “princes of the deserts” or
(“princes of the Bedawîn”) also testifies, purely and simply Arabs.

Now it is not a little curious that almost at the same time that a nomad
Arab race conquered Lower Egypt and settled in it as rulers (just as
‘Amr and the followers of Islam did over two thousand years later),
another Arab race may have imposed its rule upon Babylonia. Yet this
may have been the case; for the First Dynasty of Babylon, to which the
famous Hammurabi belonged, was very probably of Arab origin, to judge by
the forms of some of the royal names. It is by no means impossible that
there was some connection between these two conquests, and that both
Babylonia and Egypt fell, in the period before the year 2000 B.C. before
some great migratory movement from Arabia, which overran Babylonia,
Palestine, and even the Egyptian Delta.

In this manner Egypt and Babylonia may have been brought together
in common subjection to the Arab. We do not know whether any regular
communication between Egypt, under Semitic rule, and Babylonia was now
established; but we do know that during the Hyksos period there were
considerable relations between Egypt and over-sea Crete, and relations
with Mesopotamia may possibly have been established. At any rate, when
the war of liberation, which was directed by the princes of Thebes, was
finally brought to a successful conclusion and the Arabs were expelled,
we find the Egyptians a much changed nation. They had adopted for war
the use of horse and chariot, which they learnt from their Semitic
conquerors, whose victory was in all probability largely gained by their
use, and, generally speaking, they had become much more like the Western
Asiatic nations. Egypt was no longer isolated, for she had been forcibly
brought into contact with the foreign world, and had learned much.
She was no longer self-contained within her own borders. If the Semites
could conquer her, so could she conquer the Semites. Armed with horse
and chariot, the Egyptians went forth to battle, and their revenge was
complete. All Palestine and Syria were Egyptian domains for five hundred
years after the conquest by Thothmes I and III, and Ashur and Babel sent
tribute to the Pharaoh of Egypt.

The reaction came, and Egypt was thrown prostrate beneath the feet of
Assyria; but her claim to dominion over the Western Asiatics was never
abandoned, and was revived in all its pomp by Ptolemy Euergetes, who
brought back in triumph to Egypt the images of the gods which had been
removed by Assyrians and Babylonians centuries before. This claim was
never allowed by the Asiatics, it is true, and their kings wrote to the
proudest Pharaoh as to an absolute equal. Even the King of Cyprus calls
the King of Egypt his brother. But Palestine was admitted to be
an Egyptian possession, and the Phoenicians were always energetic
supporters of the Egyptian régime against the lawless Bedawîn tribes,
who were constantly intriguing with the Kheta or Hittite power to the
north against Egypt.

The existence of this extra-Egyptian imperial possession meant that the
eyes of the Egyptians were now permanently turned in the direction of
Western Asia, with which they were henceforth in constant and intimate
communication. The first Theban period and the Hyksos invasion,
therefore, mark a turning-point in Egyptian history, at which we may
fitly leave it for a time in order to turn our attention to those
peoples of Western Asia with whom the Egyptians had now come into
permanent contact.

Just as new discoveries have been made in Egypt, which have modified our
previous conception of her history, so also have the excavators of
the ancient sites in the Mesopotamian valley made, during the last few
years, far-reaching discoveries, which have enabled us to add to and
revise much of our knowledge of the history of Babylonia and Assyria. In
Palestine and the Sinaitic peninsula also the spade has been used with
effect, but a detailed account of work in Sinai and Palestine falls
within the limits of a description of Biblical discoveries rather than
of this book. The following chapters will therefore deal chiefly with
modern discoveries which have told us new facts with regard to the
history of the ancient Sumerians themselves, and of the Babylonians,
Elamites, Kassites, and Assyrians, the inheritors of the ancient
Sumerian civilization, which was older than that of Egypt, and which, as
we have seen, probably contributed somewhat to its formation. These
were the two primal civilizations of the ancient world. For two thousand
years each marched upon a solitary road, without meeting the other.
Eventually the two roads converged. We have hitherto dealt with the road
of the Egyptians; we now describe that of the Mesopotamians, up to the
point of convergence.




CHAPTER IV--RECENT EXCAVATIONS IN WESTERN ASIA AND THE DAWN OF CHALDÆAN HISTORY


In the preceding pages it has been shown how recent excavations in Egypt
have revealed an entirely new chapter in the history of that country,
and how, in consequence, our theories with regard to the origin of
Egyptian civilization have been entirely remodelled. Excavations have
been and are being carried out in Mesopotamia and the adjacent countries
with no less enthusiasm and energy than in Egypt itself, and, although
it cannot be said that they have resulted in any sweeping modification
of our conceptions with regard to the origin and kinship of the early
races of Western Asia, yet they have lately added considerably to our
knowledge of the ancient history of the countries in that region of the
world. This is particularly the case in respect of the Sumerians, who,
so far as we know at present, were the earliest inhabitants of the
fertile plains of Mesopotamia. The beginnings of this ancient people
stretch back into the remote past, and their origin is still shrouded in
the mists of antiquity. When first we come across them they have already
attained a high level of civilization. They have built temples and
palaces and houses of burnt and unburnt brick, and they have reduced
their system of agriculture to a science, intersecting their country
with canals for purposes of irrigation and to ensure a good supply of
water to their cities. Their sculpture and pottery furnish abundant
evidence that they have already attained a comparatively high level in
the practice of the arts, and finally they have evolved a complicated
system of writing which originally had its origin in picture-characters,
but afterwards had been developed along phonetic lines. To have attained
to this pitch of culture argues long periods of previous development,
and we must conclude that they had been settled in Southern Babylonia
many centuries before the period to which we must assign the earliest of
their remains at present discovered.

That this people were not indigenous to Babylonia is highly probable,
but we have little data by which to determine the region from which
they originally came. Prom the fact that they built their ziggurats, or
temple towers, of huge masses of unburnt brick which rose high above
the surrounding plain, and that their ideal was to make each “like a
mountain,” it has been argued that they were a mountain race, and the
home from which they sprang has been sought in Central Asia. Other
scholars have detected signs of their origin in their language and
system of writing, and, from the fact that they spoke an agglutinative
tongue and at the earliest period arranged the characters of their
script in vertical lines like the Chinese, it has been urged that
they were of Mongol extraction. Though a case may be made out for this
hypothesis, it would be rash to dogmatize for or against it, and it is
wiser to await the discovery of further material on which a more certain
decision may be based. But whatever their origin, it is certain that the
Sumerians exercised an extraordinary influence on all races with
which, either directly or indirectly, they came in contact. The ancient
inhabitants of Elam at a very early period adopted in principle
their method of writing, and afterwards, living in isolation in the
mountainous districts of Persia, developed it on lines of their own. [*
See Chap. V, and note.] On their invasion of Babylonia the Semites
fell absolutely under Sumerian influence, and, although they eventually
conquered and absorbed the Sumerians, their civilization remained
Sumerian to the core. Moreover, by means of the Semitic inhabitants of
Babylonia Sumerian culture continued to exert its influence on other
and more distant races. We have already seen how a Babylonian element
probably enters into Egyptian civilization through Semitic infiltration
across the Straits of Bab el-Mandeb or by way of the Isthmus of Suez,
and it was Sumerian culture which these Semites brought with them.
In like manner, through the Semitic Babylonians, the Assyrians, the
Kassites, and the inhabitants of Palestine and Syria, and of some
parts of Asia Minor, Armenia, and Kurdistan, all in turn experienced
indirectly the influence of Sumerian civilization and continued in a
greater or less degree to reproduce elements of this early culture.

It will be seen that the influence of the Sumerians furnishes us with
a key to much that would otherwise prove puzzling in the history of the
early races of Western Asia. It is therefore all the more striking to
recall the fact that but a few years ago the very existence of this
ancient people was called in question. At that time the excavations in
Mesopotamia had not revealed many traces of the race itself, and its
previous existence had been mainly inferred from a number of Sumerian
compositions inscribed upon Assyrian tablets found in the library
of Ashur-bani-pal at Nineveh. These compositions were furnished with
Assyrian translations upon the tablets on which they were inscribed,
and it was correctly argued by the late Sir Henry Rawlinson, the late M.
Oppert, Prof. Schrader, Prof. Sayce, and other scholars that they were
written in the language of the earlier inhabitants of the country whom
the Semitic Babylonians had displaced. But M. Halévy started a theory to
the effect that Sumerian was not a language at all, in the proper sense
of the term, but was a cabalistic method of writing invented by the
Semitic Babylonian priests.

[Illustration: 147.jpg LIST OF ARCHAIC CUNEIFORM SIGNS.

     Drawn up by an Assyrian scribe to assist him in his studies
     of early texts. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

The argument on which the upholders of this theory mainly relied was
that many of the phonetic values of the Sumerian signs were obviously
derived from Semitic equivalents, and they hastily jumped to the
conclusion that the whole language was similarly derived from Semitic
Babylonian, and was, in fact, a purely arbitrary invention of the
Babylonian priests. This theory ignored all questions of inherent
probability, and did not attempt to explain why the Babylonian priests
should have troubled themselves to make such an invention and afterwards
have stultified themselves by carefully appending Assyrian translations
to the majority of the Sumerian compositions which they copied out.
Moreover, the nature of these compositions is not such as we should
expect to find recorded in a cabalistic method of writing. They contain
no secret lore of the Babylonian priests, but are merely hymns and
prayers and religious compositions similar to those employed by the
Babylonians and Assyrians themselves.

But in spite of its inherent improbabilities, M. Halévy succeeded in
making many converts to his theory, including Prof. Friedrich Delitzsch
and a number of the younger school of German Assyriologists. More
conservative scholars, such as Sir Henry Rawlinson, M. Oppert, and Prof.
Schrader, stoutly opposed the theory, maintaining that Sumerian was a
real language and had been spoken by an earlier race whom the Semitic
Babylonians had conquered; and they explained the resemblance of some of
the Sumerian values to Semitic roots by supposing that Sumerian had
not been suddenly superseded by the language of the Semitic invaders
of Babylonia, but that the two tongues had been spoken for long periods
side by side and that each had been strongly influenced by the other.
This very probable and sane explanation has been fully corroborated
by subsequent excavations, particularly those that were carried out at
Telloh in Southern Babylonia by the late M. de Sarzec. In these mounds,
which mark the site of the ancient Sumerian city of Shirpurla, were
found thousands of clay tablets inscribed in archaic characters and in
the Sumerian language, proving that it had actually been the language of
the early inhabitants of Babylonia; while the examples of their art and
the representations of their form and features, which were also afforded
by the diggings at Telloh, proved once for all that the Sumerians were
a race of strongly marked characteristics and could not be ascribed to a
Semitic stock.

The system of writing invented by the ancient Sumerians was adopted by
the Semitic Babylonians, who modified it to suit their own language.
Moreover, the archaic forms of the characters, many of which under the
Sumerians still retained resemblances to the pictures of objects from
which they were descended, were considerably changed. The lines, of
which they were originally composed, gave way to wedges, and the number
of the wedges of which each sign consisted was gradually diminished, so
that in the time of the Assyrians and the later Babylonians many of the
characters bore small resemblance to the ancient Sumerian forms
from which they had been derived. The reading of Sumerian and early
Babylonian inscriptions by the late Assyrian scribes was therefore an
accomplishment only to be acquired as the result of long study, and it
is interesting to note that as an assistance to the reading of these
early texts the scribes compiled lists of archaic signs. Sometimes
opposite each archaic character they drew a picture of the object from
which they imagined it was derived. This fact is significant as proving
that the Assyrian scribes recognized the pictorial origin of cuneiform
writing, but the pictures they drew opposite the signs are rather
fanciful, and it cannot be said that their guesses were very successful.
That we are able to criticize the theories of the Assyrians as to the
origin and forms of the early characters is in the main due to M. de
Sarzec’s labours, from whose excavations many thousands of inscriptions
of the Sumerians have been recovered.

The main results of M. de Sarzec’s diggings at Telloh have already been
described by M. Maspero in his history, and therefore we need not go
over them again, but will here confine ourselves to the results which
have been obtained from recent excavations at Telloh and at other sites
in Western Asia. With the death of M. de Sarzec, which occurred in his
sixty-fifth year, on May 31, 1901, the wonderfully successful series of
excavations which he had carried out at Telloh was brought to an end. In
consequence it was feared at the time that the French diggings on this
site might be interrupted for a considerable period. Such an event would
have been regretted by all those who are interested in the early history
of the East, for, in spite of the treasures found by M. de Sarzec in the
course of his various campaigns, it was obvious that the site was far
from being exhausted, and that the tells as yet unexplored contained
inscriptions and antiquities extending back to the very earliest periods
of Sumerian history.

[Illustration: 150.jpg FRAGMENT OF A LIST OF ARCHAIC CUNEIFORM SIGNS.]

     Opposite each the scribe has drawn a picture of the object
     from which he imagined it was derived. Photograph by Messrs.
     Mansell & Co.

The announcement which was made in 1902, that the French government had
appointed Capt. Gaston Cros as the late M. de Sarzec’s successor, was
therefore received with general satisfaction. The fact that Capt. Cros
had already successfully carried out several difficult topographical
missions in the region of the Sahara was a sufficient guarantee that the
new diggings would be conducted on a systematic and exhaustive scale.

The new director of the French mission in Chaldæa arrived at Telloh in
January, 1903, and one of his first acts was to shift the site of the
mission’s settlement from the bank of the Shatt el-Hai, where it had
always been established in the time of M. de Sarzec, to the mounds where
the actual digging took place. The Shatt el-Hai had been previously
chosen as the site of the settlement to ensure a constant supply of
water, and as it was more easily protected against attack by night.
But the fact that it was an hour’s ride from the diggings caused an
unnecessary loss of time, and rendered the strict supervision of the
diggers a matter of considerable difficulty. During the first season’s
work rough huts of reeds, surrounded by a wall of earth and a ditch,
served the new expedition for its encampment among the mounds of Telloh,
but last year these makeshift arrangements were superseded by a regular
house built out of the burnt bricks which are found in abundance on the
site. A reservoir has also been built, and caravans of asses bring water
in skins from the Shatt el-Hai to keep it filled with a constant supply
of water, while the excellent relations which Capt. Cros has established
with the Karagul Arabs, who occupy Telloh and its neighbourhood, have
proved to be the best kind of protection for the mission engaged in
scientific work upon the site.

The group of mounds and hillocks, known as Telloh, which marks the site
of the ancient Sumerian city of Shirpurla, is easily distinguished from
the flat surrounding desert. The mounds extend in a rough oval formation
running north and south, about two and a half miles long and one and a
quarter broad. In the early spring, when the desert is covered with a
light green verdure, the ruins are clearly marked out as a yellow spot
in the surrounding green, for vegetation does not grow upon them. In the
centre of this oval, which approximately marks the limits of the ancient
city and its suburbs, are four large tells or mounds running, roughly,
north and south, their sides descending steeply on the east, but with
their western slopes rising by easier undulations from the plain. These
four principal tells are known as the “Palace Tell,” the “Tell of the
Fruit-house,” the “Tell of the Tablets,” and the “Great Tell,” and,
rising as they do in the centre of the site, they mark the position of
the temples and the other principal buildings of the city.

An indication of the richness of the site in antiquities was afforded
to the new mission before it had started regular excavation and while
it was yet engaged in levelling its encampment and surrounding it with a
wall and ditch. The spot selected for the camp was a small mound to the
south of the site of Telloh, and here, in the course of preparing the
site for the encampment and digging the ditch, objects were found at
a depth of less than a foot beneath the surface of the soil. These
included daggers, copper vases, seal-cylinders, rings of lapis and
cornelian, and pottery. M. de Sarzec had carried out his latest
diggings in the Tell of the Tablets, and here Capt. Cros continued
the excavations and came upon the remains of buildings and recovered
numerous objects, dating principally from the period of Gudea and
the kings of Ur. The finds included small terra-cotta figures, a
boundary-stone of Gamil-Sin, and a new statue of Gudea, to which we will
refer again presently.

In the Tell of the Fruit-house M. de Sarzec had already discovered
numbers of monuments dating from the earlier periods of Sumerian history
before the conquest and consolidation of Babylonia under Sargon of
Agade, and had excavated a primitive terrace built by the early king
Ur-Ninâ. Both on and around this large mound Capt. Cros cut an extensive
series of trenches, and in digging to the north of the mound he found a
number of objects, including an alabaster tablet of Ente-mena which had
been blackened by fire. At the foot of the tell he found a copper helmet
like those represented on the famous Stele of Vultures discovered by
M. de Sarzec, and among the tablets here recovered was one with an
inscription of the time of Urukagina, which records the complete
destruction of the city of Shirpurla during his reign, and will be
described in greater detail later on in this chapter. On the mound
itself a considerable area was uncovered with remains of buildings
still in place, the use of which appears to have been of an industrial
character. They included flights of steps, canals with raised banks,
and basins for storing water. Not far off are the previously discovered
wells of Bannadu, so that it is legitimate to suppose that Capt. Cros
has here come upon part of the works which were erected at a very early
period of Sumerian history for the distribution of water to this portion
of the city.

[Illustration: 154.jpg Obelisk of Manishtusu.]

     An early Semitic king of the city of Kish in Babylonia. The
     photograph is taken from M. de Morgan’s Delegation en Perse,
     M’em., t. i, pi. ix.

In the Palace Tell Capt. Cros has sunk a series of deep shafts to
determine precisely the relations which the buildings of Ur-Bau and
Gudea, found already on this part of the site, bear to each other, and
to the building of Adad-nadin-akhê, which had been erected there at
a much later period. Prom this slight sketch of the work carried out
during the last two years at Telloh it will have been seen that the
Prench mission in Chaldæa is at present engaged in excavations of a
most important character, which are being conducted in a regular and
scientific manner. As the area of the excavations marks the site of the
chief city of the Sumerians, the diggings there have yielded and
are yielding material of the greatest interest and value for the
reconstruction of the early history of Chaldæa. After briefly describing
the character and results of other recent excavations in Mesopotamia and
the neighbouring lands, we will return to the discoveries at Telloh and
sketch the new information they supply on the history of the earliest
inhabitants of the country.

Another French mission that is carrying out work of the very greatest
interest to the student of early Babylonian history is that which is
excavating at Susa in Persia, under the direction of M. J. de Morgan,
whose work on the prehistoric and early dynastic sites in Egypt has
already been described. M. de Morgan’s first season’s digging at Susa
was carried out in the years 1897-8, and the success with which he met
from the very first, when cutting trenches in the mound which marks
the acropolis of the ancient city, has led him to concentrate his main
efforts in this part of the ruins ever since. Provisional trenches cut
in the part of the ruins called “the Royal City,” and in others of the
mounds at Susa, indicate that many remains may eventually be found there
dating from the period of the Achæmenian Kings of Persia. But it is in
the mound of the acropolis at Susa that M. de Morgan has found monuments
of the greatest historical interest and value, not only in the history
of ancient Elam, but also in that of the earliest rulers of Chaldæa.

In the diggings carried out during the first season’s work on the site,
an obelisk was found inscribed on four sides with a long text of some
sixty-nine columns, written in Semitic Babylonian by the orders
of Manishtusu, a very early Semitic king of the city of Kish in
Babylonia.[* See illustration.] The text records the purchase by the
King of Kish of immense tracts of land situated at Kish and in
its neighbourhood, and its length is explained by the fact that it
enumerates full details of the size and position of each estate, and the
numbers and some of the names of the dwellers on the estates who were
engaged in their cultivation. After details have been given of a number
of estates situated in the same neighbourhood, a summary is appended
referring to the whole neighbourhood, and the fact is recorded that the
district dealt with in the preceding catalogue and summary had been duly
acquired by purchase by Manishtusu, King of Kish. The long text upon
the obelisk is entirely taken up with details of the purchase of the
territory, and therefore its subject has not any great historical value.
Mention is made in it of two personages, one of whom may possibly
be identified with a Babylonian ruler whose name is known from other
sources. If the proposed identification t should prove to be correct,
it would enable us to assign a more precise date to Manishtusu than has
hitherto been possible. One of the personages in question was a certain
Urukagina, the son of Engilsa, patesi of Shirpurla, and it has been
suggested that he is the same Urukagina who is known to have occupied
the throne of Shirpurla, though this identification would bring
Manishtusu down somewhat later than is probable from the general
character of his inscriptions. The other personage mentioned in the text
is the son of Manishtusu, named Mesalim, and there is more to be said
for the identification of this prince with Mesilim, the early King of
Kish, who reigned at a period anterior to that of Eannadu, patesi of
Shirpurla.

The mere fact of so large and important an obelisk, inscribed with a
Semitic text by an early Babylonian king, being found at Susa was
an indication that other monuments of even greater interest might be
forthcoming from the same spot; and this impression was intensified when
a stele of victory was found bearing an inscription of Naram-Sin, the
early Semitic King of Agade, who reigned about 3750 B.C. One face of
this stele is sculptured with a representation of the king conquering
his enemies in a mountainous country. [* See illustration.] The king
himself wears a helmet adorned with the horns of a bull, and he carries
his battle-axe and his bow and an arrow. He is nearly at the summit of
a high mountain, and up its steep sides, along paths through the
trees which clothe the mountain, climb his allies and warriors bearing
standards and weapons. The king’s enemies are represented suing for
mercy as they turn to fly before him. One grasps a broken spear, while
another, crouching before the king, has been smitten in the throat by an
arrow from the king’s bow. On the plain surface of the stele above the
king’s head may be seen traces of an inscription of Narâm-Sin engraved
in three columns in the archaic characters of his period. From the few
signs of the text that remain, we gather that Narâm-Sin had conducted
a campaign with the assistance of certain allied princes, including the
Princes of Sidur, Saluni, and Lulubi, and it is not improbable that
they are to be identified with the warriors represented on the stele as
climbing the mountain behind Narâm-Sin.

In reference to this most interesting stele of Narâm-Sin we may here
mention another inscription of this king, found quite recently at
Susa and published only this year, which throws additional light on
Narâm-Sin’s allies and on the empire which he and his father Sargon
founded. The new inscription was engraved on the base of a diorite
statue, which had been broken to pieces so that only the base with
a portion of the text remained. From this inscription we learn that
Narâm-Sin was the head of a confederation of nine chief allies, or
vassal princes, and waged war on his enemies with their assistance.
Among these nine allies of course the Princes of Sidur, Saluni, and
Lulubi are to be included. The new text further records that Narâm-Sin
made an expedition against Magan (the Sinaitic peninsula), and defeated
Manium, the lord of that region, and that he cut blocks of stone in the
mountains there and transported them to his city of Agade, where
from one of them he made the statue on the base of which the text was
inscribed. It was already known from the so-called “Omens of Sargon
and Narâm-Sin” (a text inscribed on a clay tablet from Ashur-bani-pal’s
library at Nineveh which associates the deeds of these two early rulers
with certain augural phenomena) that Narâm-Sin had made an expedition
to Sinai in the course of his reign and had conquered the king of the
country. The new text gives contemporary confirmation of this assertion
and furnishes us with additional information with regard to the name of
the conquered ruler of Sinai and other details of the campaign.

That monuments of such great interest to the early history of Chaldæa
should have been found at Susa in Persia was sufficiently startling,
but an easy explanation was at first forthcoming from the fact that
Narâm-Sin’s stele of victory had been used by the later Elamite king,
Shutruk-Nakhkhunte, for an inscription of his own; this he had engraved
in seven long lines along the great cone in front of Narâm-Sin, which is
probably intended to represent the peak of the mountain. From the fact
that it had been used in this way by Shutruk-Nakhkhunte, it seemed
permissible to infer that it had been captured in the course of a
campaign and brought to Susa as a trophy of war. But we shall see later
on that the existence of early Babylonian inscriptions and monuments in
the mound of the acropolis at Susa is not to be explained in this way,
but was due to the wide extension of both Sumerian and Semitic influence
throughout Western Asia from the very earliest periods. This subject
will be treated more fully in the chapter dealing with the early history
of Blam.

The upper surface of the tell of the acropolis at Susa for a depth of
nearly two metres contains remains of the buildings and antiquities
of the Achæmenian kings and others of both later and earlier dates.
In these upper strata of the mound are found remains of the
Arab, Sassanian, Parthian, Seleucian, and Persian periods, mixed
indiscriminately with one another and with Elamite objects and materials
of all ages, from that of the earliest patesis down to that of the
Susian kings of the seventh century B.C.

[Illustration: 160.jpg BABIL.]

     The most northern of the mounds which now mark the site of
     the ancient city of Babylon; used for centuries as a quarry
     for building materials.

The reason of this mixture of the remains of many races and periods is
that the later builders on the mound made use of the earlier building
materials which they found preserved within it. Along the skirts of the
mound may still be seen the foundations of the wall which formed the
principal defence of the acropolis in the time of Xerxes, and in many
places not only are the foundations preserved but large pieces of the
wall itself still rise above the surface of the soil.

[Illustration: 160a.jpg “STELE OF VICTORY”]

[Illustration: 160a-text.jpg TEXT FOR “STELE OF VICTORY”]

     Stele of Narâm-Sin, an early Semitic King of Agade in
     Babylonia, who reigned about B. C. 3750. From the photograph
     by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

The plan of the wall is quite irregular, following the contours of the
mound, and, though it is probable that the wall was strengthened and
defended at intervals by towers, no trace of these now remains. The
wall is very thick and built of unburnt bricks, and the system of
fortification seems to have been extremely simple at this period.



[Illustration: 161.jpg ROUGHLY HEWN SCULPTURE OF A LION STANDING OVER A
FALLEN MAN, FOUND AT BABYLON.]

     The group probably represents Babylon or the Babylonian king
     triumphing over the country’s enemies. The Arabs regard the
     figure as an evil spirit, and it is pitted with the marks of
     bullets shot at it. They also smear it with filth when they
     can do so unobserved; in the photograph some newly smeared
     filth may be seen adhering to the side of the lion.

The earlier citadel or fortress of the city of Susa was built at the top
of the mound and must have been a more formidable stronghold than that
of the Achæmenian kings, for, besides its walls, it had the additional
protection of the steep slopes of the mound.

Below the depth of two metres from the surface of the mound are found
strata in which Elamite objects and materials are, no longer mixed with
the remains of later ages, but here the latest Elamite remains are found
mingled with objects and materials dating from the earliest periods of
Elam’s history. The use of un-burnt bricks as the principal material
for buildings erected on the mound in all ages has been another cause
of this mixture of materials, for it has little power of resistance to
water, and a considerable rain-storm will wash away large portions
of the surface and cause the remains of different strata to be mixed
indiscriminately with one another. In proportion as the trenches were
cut deeper into the mound the strata which were laid bare showed remains
of earlier ages than those in the upper layers, though here also remains
of different periods are considerably mixed. The only building that has
hitherto been discovered at Susa by M. de Morgan, the ground plan of
which was in a comparatively good state of preservation, was a small
temple of the god Shu-shinak, and this owed its preservation to the
fact that it was not built of unburnt brick, but was largely composed of
burnt brick and plaques and tiles of enamelled terra-cotta.

But although the diggings of M. de Morgan at Susa have so far afforded
little information on the subject of Elamite architecture, the separate
objects found have enabled us to gain considerable knowledge of the
artistic achievements of the race during the different periods of
its existence. Moreover, the stelæ and stone records that have been
recovered present a wealth of material for the study of the long history
of Elam and of the kings who ruled in Babylonia during the earliest
ages.

[Illustration: 163.jpg GENERAL VIEW OF THE EXCAVATIONS ON THE KASR AT
BABYLON.]

     Showing the depth in the mound to which the diggings are
     carried.

The most famous of M. de Morgan’s recent finds is the long code of
laws drawn up by Hammurabi, the greatest king of the First Dynasty of
Babylon.* This was engraved upon a huge block of black diorite, and
was found in the tell of the acropolis in the winter of 1901-2. This
document in itself has entirely revolutionized current theories as to
the growth and origin of the principal ancient legal codes. It proves
that Babylonia was the fountainhead from which many later races borrowed
portions of their legislative systems. Moreover, the subjects dealt
with in this code of laws embrace most of the different classes of the
Babylonian people, and it regulates their duties and their relations
to one another in their ordinary occupations and pursuits. It therefore
throws much light upon early Babylonian life and customs, and we shall
return to it in the chapter dealing with these subjects.

     * It will be noted that the Babylonian dynasties are
     referred to throughout this volume as “First Dynasty,”
      “Second Dynasty,” “Third Dynasty,” etc. They are thus
     distinguished from the Egyptian dynasties, the order of
     which is indicated by Roman numerals, e.g. “Ist Dynasty,”
      “IId Dynasty,” “IIId Dynasty.”

The American excavators at Nippur, under the direction of Mr. Haynes,
have done much in the past to increase our knowledge of Sumerian and
early Babylonian history, but the work has not been continued in
recent years, and, unfortunately, little progress has been made in the
publication of the material already accumulated. In fact, the leadership
in American excavation has passed from the University of Pennsylvania to
that of Chicago. This progressive university has sent out an expedition,
under the general direction of Prof. R. F. Harper (with Dr. E. J. Banks
as director of excavations), which is doing excellent work at Bismya,
and, although it is too early yet to expect detailed accounts of their
achievements, it is clear that they have already met with considerable
success. One of their recent finds consists of a white marble statue of
an early Sumerian king named Daudu, which was set up in the temple of
E-shar in the city of Udnun, of which he was ruler. From its archaic
style of workmanship it may be placed in the earliest period of Sumerian
history, and may be regarded as an earnest of what may be expected to
follow from the future labours of Prof. Harper’s expedition.

[Illustration: 165.jpg WITHIN THE PALACE OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR II.]

At Fâra and at Abû Hatab in Babylonia, the Deutsch-Orient Gesellschaft,
under Dr. Koldewey’s direction, has excavated Sumerian and Babylonian
remains of the early period. At the former site they unearthed the
remains of many private houses and found some Sumerian tablets of
accounts and commercial documents, but little of historical interest;
and an inscription, which seems to have come from Abu Hatab, probably
proves that the Sumerian name of the city whose site it marks was
Kishurra. But the main centre of German activity in Babylonia is the
city of Babylon itself, where for the last seven years Dr. Koldewey has
conducted excavations, unearthing the palaces of Nebuchadnezzar II on
the mound termed the Kasr, identifying the temple of E-sagila under the
mound called Tell Amran ibn-Ali, tracing the course of the sacred way
between E-sagila and the palace-mound, and excavating temples dedicated
to the goddess Ninmakh and the god Ninib.

[Illustration: 166.jpg EXCAVATIONS IN THE TEMPLE OP NINIB AT BABYLON.]

     In the middle distance may be seen the metal trucks running
     on light rails which are employed on the work for the
     removal of the débris from the diggings.

Dr. Andrae, Dr. Koldewey’s assistant, has also completed the excavation
of the temple dedicated to Nabû at Birs Nimrud. On the principal mound
at this spot, which marks the site of the ancient city of Borsippa,
traces of the ziggurat, or temple tower, may still be seen rising from
the soil, the temple of Nabû lying at a lower level below the steep
slope of the mound, which is mainly made up of débris from the
ziggurat. Dr. Andrae has recently left Babylonia for Assyria, where
his excavations at Sher-ghat, the site of the ancient Assyrian city of
Ashur, are confidently expected to throw considerable light on the early
history of that country and the customs of the people, and already he
has made numerous finds of considerable interest.

[Illustration: 167.jpg THE PRINCIPAL MOUND OF BIRS NIMRUD, WHICH MARKS
THE SITE OP THE ANCIENT CITY OP BORSIPPA.]

Since the early spring of 1903 excavations have been conducted at
Kuyunjik, the site of the city of Nineveh, by Messrs. L. W. King and R.
C. Thompson on behalf of the Trustees of the British Museum, and have
resulted in the discovery of many early remains in the lower strata of
the mound, in addition to the finding of new portions of the two palaces
already known and partly excavated, the identification of a third
palace, and the finding of an ancient temple dedicated to Nabû, whose
existence had already been inferred from a study of the Assyrian
inscriptions.* All these diggings at Babylon, at Ashur, and at Nineveh
throw more light upon the history of the country during the Assyrian and
Neo-Babylonian periods, and will be referred to later in the volume.

     * It may be noted that excavations are also being actively
     carried on in Palestine at the present time. Mr. Macalister
     has for some years been working for the Palestine
     Exploration Fund at Gezer; Dr. Schumacher is digging at
     Megiddo for the German Palestine Society; and Prof. Sellin
     is at present excavating at Taanach (Ta’annak) and will
     shortly start work at Dothan. Good work on remains of later
     historical periods is also being carried on under the
     auspices of the Deutsch-Orient Gesellschaft at Ba’albek and
     in Galilee. It would be tempting to include here a summary
     of the very interesting results that have recently been
     achieved in this fruitful field of archaeological research,
     for it is true that these excavations may strictly be said
     to bear on the history of a portion of Western Asia. But the
     problems which they raise would more naturally be discussed
     in a work dealing with recent excavation and research in
     relation to the Bible, and to have summarized them
     adequately would have increased the size of the present
     volume considerably beyond its natural limits. They have
     therefore not been included within the scope of the present
     work.

[Illustration: 168.jpg THE PRINCIPAL MOUND AT SHEKGHAT, WHICH MARKS THE
SITE OF ASHUK, THE ANCIENT CAPITAL OF THE ASSYRIANS.]

Meanwhile, we will return to the diggings described at the beginning
of this chapter, as affording new information concerning the earliest
periods of Chaldæan history.

A most interesting inscription has recently been discovered by Capt.
Cros at Telloh, which throws considerable light on the rivalry which
existed between the cities of Shirpurla and Gishkhu, and at the same
time furnishes valuable material for settling the chronology of the
earliest rulers whose inscriptions have been found at Mppur and their
relations to contemporary rulers in Shirpurla.

[Illustration: 169.jpg THE MOUND OF KUYUNJIK, WHICH FORMED ONE OF THE
PALACE MOUNDS OF THE ANCIENT ASSYRIAN CITY OF NINEVEH.]

The cities of Gishkhu and Shirpurla were probably situated not far from
one another, and their rivalry is typical of the history of the early
city-states of Babylonia. The site of the latter city, as has already
been said, is marked by the mounds of Telloh on the east bank of the
Shatt el-Hai, the natural stream joining the Tigris and Euphrates, which
has been improved and canalized by the dwellers in Southern Babylonia
from the earliest period.

[Illustration: 170.jpg WINGED BULL IN THE PALACE OF SENNACHERIB ON
KUYUNJIK, THE PRINCIPAL MOUND MARKING THE SITE OF NINEVEH.]

The site of Gishkhu may be set with considerable probability not far to
the north of Telloh on the opposite bank of the Shatt el-Hai. These
two cities, situated so close to one another, exercised considerable
political influence, and though less is known of Gishkhu than of
the more famous Babylonian cities such as Ur, Brech, and Larsam, her
proximity to Shirpurla gave her an importance which she might not
otherwise have possessed. The earliest knowledge we possess of the
relations existing between Gishkhu and Shirpurla refers to the reign of
Mesilim, King of Kish, the period of whose rule may be provisionally set
before that of Sargon of Agade, i.e, about 4000 B.C.

At this period there was rivalry between the two cities, in consequence
of which Mesilim, King of Kish, was called in as arbitrator. A record of
the treaty of delimitation that was drawn up on this occasion has been
preserved upon the recently discovered cone of Entemena. This document
tells us that at the command of the god Enlil, described as “the king
of the countries,” Ningirsu, the chief god of Shirpurla, and the god of
Gishkhu decided to draw up a line of division between their respective
territories, and that Mesilim, King of Kish, acting under the direction
of his own god Kadi, marked out the frontier and set up a stele between
the two territories to commemorate the fixing of the boundary.

This policy of fixing the boundary by arbitration seems to have been
successful, and to have secured peace between Shirpurla and Gishkhu
for some generations. But after a period which cannot be accurately
determined a certain patesi of Gishkhu, named Ush, was filled with
ambition to extend his territory at the expense of Shirpurla. He
therefore removed the stele which Mesilim had set up, and, invading the
plain of Shirpurla, succeeded in conquering and holding a district named
Gu-edin. But Ush’s successful raid was not of any permanent benefit to
his city, for he was in his turn defeated by the forces of Shirpurla,
and his successor upon the throne, a patesi named Enakalli, abandoned a
policy of aggression, and concluded with Eannadu, patesi of Shirpurla, a
solemn treaty concerning the boundary between their realms, the text of
which has been preserved to us upon the famous Stele of Vultures in the
Louvre.*

     * A fragment of this stele is also preserved in the British
     Museum. It is published in Cuneiform Texts in the British
     Museum, Pt. vii.

According to this treaty Gu-edin was restored to Shirpurla, and a deep
ditch was dug between the two territories which should permanently
indicate the line of demarcation. The stele of Mesilim was restored to
its place, and a second stele was inscribed and set up as a memorial
of the new treaty. Enakalli did not negotiate the treaty on equal terms
with Eannadu, for he only secured its ratification by consenting to pay
heavy tribute in grain for the supply of the great temples of Nin-girsu
and Ninâ in Shirpurla. It would appear that under Eannadu the power
and influence of Shirpurla were extended over the whole of Southern
Babylonia, and reached even to the borders of Elam. At any rate, it is
clear that during his lifetime the city of Gishkhu was content to remain
in a state of subjection to its more powerful neighbour. But it was
always ready to seize any opportunity of asserting itself and of
attempting to regain its independence.

[Illustration: 172.jpg CLAY MEMORIAL-TABLET OF EANNADU.]

     The characters of the inscription well illustrate the
     pictorial origin of the Sumerian system of writing.
     Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

Accordingly, after Eannadu’s death the men of Gishkhu again took the
offensive. At this time Urlumma, the son and successor of Enakalli, was
on the throne of Gishkhu, and he organized the forces of the city
and led them out to battle. His first act was to destroy the frontier
ditches named after Ningirsu and Ninâ, the principal god and goddess of
Shirpurla, which Eannadu, the powerful foe of Gishkhu, had caused to be
dug. He then tore down the stele on which the terms of Eannadu’s treaty
had been engraved and broke it into pieces by casting it into the fire,
and the shrines which Eannadu had built near the frontier, and had
consecrated to the gods of Shirpurla, he razed to the ground. But
again Shirpurla in the end proved too strong for Gishkhu. The ruler
in Shirpurla at this time was Enannadu, who had succeeded his brother
Eannadu upon the throne. He marched out to meet the invading forces
of the men of Gishkhu, and a battle was fought in the territory of
Shirpurla. According to one account, the forces of Shirpurla were
victorious, while on the cone of Ente-mena no mention is made of
the issue of the combat. The result may not have been decisive, but
Enannadu’s action at least checked Urlumma’s encroachments for the time.

It would appear that the death of the reigning patesi in Shirpurla was
always the signal for an attack upon that city by the men of Gishkhu.
They may have hoped that the new ruler would prove a less successful
leader than the last, or that the accession of a new monarch might give
rise to internal dissensions in the city which would weaken Shirpurla’s
power of resisting a sudden attack. As Eannadu’s death had encouraged
Urlumma to lead out the men of Gishkhu, so the death of Enannadu seemed
to him a good opportunity to make another bid for victory. But this time
the result of the battle was not indecisive. Entemena had succeeded his
father Enannadu, and he led out to victory the forces of Shir-purla. The
battle was fought near the canal Lumma-girnun-ta, and when the men of
Gishkhu were put to flight they left sixty of their fellows lying dead
upon the banks of the canal. Entemena tells us that the bones of these
warriors were left to bleach in the open plain, but he seems to have
buried those of the men of Gishkhu who fell in the pursuit, for he
records that in five separate places he piled up burial-mounds in which
the bodies of the slain were interred. Entemena was not content with
merely inflicting a defeat upon the army of Gishkhu and driving it back
within its own borders, for he followed up his initial advantage and
captured the capital itself. He deposed and imprisoned Urlumma, and
chose one of his own adherents to rule as patesi of Gishkhu in his
stead. The man he appointed for this high office was named Hi, and he
had up to that time been priest in Ninâb. Entemena summoned him to his
presence, and, after marching in a triumphal procession from Girsu
in the neighbourhood of Shirpurla to the conquered city, proceeded to
invest him with the office of patesi of Gishkhu.

Entemena also repaired the frontier ditches named after Ningirsu and
Ninâ, which had been employed for purposes of irrigation as well as for
marking the frontier; and he gave instructions to Hi to employ the men
dwelling in the district of Karkar on this work, as a punishment for
the active part they had taken in the recent raid into the territory of
Shirpurla. Entemena also restored and extended the system of canals
in the region between the Tigris and the Euphrates, lining one of the
principal channels with stone.

[Illustration: 175.jpg MARBLE GATE]

     Socket Bearing An Inscription Of Entemena, A Powerful
     Patesi, Or Viceroy, Of Shirpurla. In the photograph the
     gate-socket is resting on its side so as to show the
     inscription, but when in use it was set flat upon the ground
     and partly buried below the level of the pavement of the
     building in which it was used. It was fixed at the side of a
     gateway and the pivot of the heavy gate revolved in the
     shallow hole or depression in its centre. As stone is not
     found in the alluvial soil of Babylonia, the blocks for
     gate-sockets had to be brought from great distances and they
     were consequently highly prized. The kings and patesis who
     used them in their buildings generally had their names and
     titles engraved upon them, and they thus form a valuable
     class of inscriptions for the study of the early history.
     Photograph by Messrs. Man-sell & Co.

He thus added greatly to the wealth of Shirpurla by increasing the area
of territory under cultivation, and he continued to exercise authority
in Gishkhu by means of officers appointed by himself. A record of his
victory over Gishkhu was inscribed by Entemena upon a number of clay
cones, that the fame of it might be preserved in future days to the
honour of Ningirsu and the goddess Ninâ. He ends this record with a
prayer for the preservation of the frontier. If ever in time to come the
men of Gishkhu should break out across the frontier-ditch of Ningirsu,
or the frontier-ditch of Ninâ, in order to seize or lay waste the lands
of Shirpurla, whether they be men of the city of Gishkhu itself or men
of the mountains, he prays that Enlil may destroy them and that Ningirsu
may lay his curse upon them; and if ever the warriors of his own city
should be called upon to defend it, he prays that they may be full of
courage and ardour for their task.

The greater part of this information with regard to the struggles
between Gishkhu and Shirpurla, between the period of Mesilim, King of
Kish, and that of Entemena, is supplied by the inscription of the latter
ruler which has been found written around a small cone of clay. There is
little doubt that the text was also engraved by the orders of Entemena
upon a stone stele which was set up, like those of Mesilim and Eannadu,
upon the frontier. Other copies of the inscription were probably
engraved and erected in the cities of Gishkhu and Shirpurla, and to
ensure the preservation of the record Entemena probably had numerous
copies of it made upon small cones of clay which were preserved and
possibly buried in the structure of the temples of Shirpurla. Entemena’s
foresight in this matter has been justified by results, for, while his
great memorials of stone have perished, the preservation of one of his
small cones has sufficed to make known to later ages his own and his
forefathers’ prowess in their continual contests with their ancient rival
Gishkhu.

After the reign of Entemena we have little information with regard to
the relations between Gishkhu and Shirpurla, though it is probable that
the effects of his decisive victory continued to exercise a moderating
influence on Gishkhu’s desire for expansion and secured a period
of peaceful development for Shirpurla without the continual fear of
encroachments on the part of her turbulent neighbour. We may assume that
this period of tranquillity continued during the reigns of Enannadu II,
Enlitarzi, and Lugal-anda, but, when in the reign of Urukagina the men
of Gishkhu once more emerge from their temporary obscurity, they appear
as the authors of deeds of rapine and bloodshed committed on a scale
that was rare even in that primitive age.

In the earlier stages of their rivalry Gishkhu had always been defeated,
or at any rate checked, in her actual conflicts with Shirpurla. When
taking the aggressive the men of Gishkhu seem generally to have confined
themselves to the seizure of territory, such as the district of Gu-edin,
which was situated on the western bank of the Shaft el-Hai and divided
from their own lands only by the frontier-ditch. If they ever actually
crossed the Shaft el-Hai and raided the lands on its eastern bank, they
never ventured to attack the city of Shirpurla itself. And, although
their raids were attended with some success in their initial stages, the
ruling patesis of Shirpurla were always strong enough to check them; and
on most occasions they carried the war into the territory of Gishkhu,
with the result that they readjusted the boundary on their own terms.
But it would appear that all these primitive Chalæan cities were subject
to alternate periods of expansion and defeat, and Shirpurla was not an
exception to the rule. It was probably not due so much to Urukagina’s
personal qualities or defects as a leader that Shirpurla suffered
the greatest reverse in her history during his reign, but rather to
Gishkhu’s gradual increase in power at a time when Shirpurla herself
remained inactive, possibly lulled into a false sense of security by the
memory of her victories in the past. Whatever may have been the cause of
Gishkhu’s final triumph, it is certain that it took place in Urukagina’s
reign, and that for many years afterwards the hegemony of Southern
Babylonia remained in her hands, while Shirpurla for a long period
passed completely out of existence as an independent or semi-independent
state.

The evidence of the catastrophe that befell Shirpurla at this period is
furnished by a small clay tablet recently found at Telloh during Captain
Cros’s excavations on that site. The document on which the facts in
question are recorded had no official character, and in all probability
it had not been stored in any library or record chamber. The actual spot
at Telloh where it was found was to the north of the mound in which
the most ancient buildings have been recovered, and at the depth of two
metres below the surface. No other tablets appear to have been found
near it, but that fact in itself would not be sufficient evidence on
which to base any theory as to its not having originally formed part of
the archives of the city. Its unofficial character is attested by the
form of the tablet and the manner in which the information upon it is
arranged. In shape there is little to distinguish the document from the
tablets of accounts inscribed in the reign of Urukagina, great numbers
of which have been found recently at Telloh. Roughly square in shape,
its edges are slightly convex, and the text is inscribed in a series of
narrow columns upon both the obverse and the reverse. The text itself
is not a carefully arranged composition, such as are the votive and
historical inscriptions of early Sumerian rulers. It consists of a
series of short sentences enumerating briefly and without detail the
separate deeds of violence and sacrilege performed by the men of Gishkhu
after their capture of the city. It is little more than a catalogue or
list of the shrines and temples destroyed during the sack of the city,
or defiled by the blood of the men of Shirpurla who were slain therein.
No mention is made in the list of the palace of the Urukagina, or of any
secular building, or of the dwellings of the citizens themselves. There
is little doubt that these also were despoiled and destroyed by the
victorious enemy, but the writer of the tablet is not concerned for the
moment with the fate of his city or his fellow citizens. He appears to
be overcome with the thought of the deeds of sacrilege committed against
his gods; his mind is entirely taken up with the magnitude of the
insult offered to the god Ningirsu, the city-god of Shirpurla. His bare
enumeration of the deeds of sacrilege and violence loses little by its
brevity, and, when he has ended the list of his accusations against the
men of Gishkhu, he curses the goddess to whose influence he attributes
their success.

No composition at all like this document has yet been recovered, and as
it is not very long we may here give a translation of the text. It will
be seen that the writer plunges at once into the subject of his
charges against the men of Gishkhu. No historical _résumé_ prefaces
his accusations, and he gives no hint of the circumstances that have
rendered their delivery possible. The temples of his city have been
profaned and destroyed, and his indignation finds vent in a mere
enumeration of their titles. To his mind the facts need no comment,
for to him it is barely conceivable that such sacred places of ancient
worship should have been defiled. He launches his indictment against
Gishkhu in the following terms: “The men of Gishkhu have set fire to the
temple of E-ki [... ], they have set fire to Antashura, and they have
carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They have
shed blood in the palace of Tirash, they have shed blood in Abzubanda,
they have shed blood in the shrine of Enlil and in the shrine of the
Sun-god, they have shed blood in Akhush, and they have carried away the
silver and the precious stones therefrom! They have shed blood in the
Gikana of the sacred grove of the goddess Ninmakh, and they have carried
away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They have shed blood
in Baga, and they have carried away the silver and the precious stones
therefrom! They have shed blood in Abzu-ega, they have set fire to
the temple of Gatumdug, and they have carried away the silver and the
precious stones therefrom, and have destroyed her statue! They have set
fire to the.... of the temple E-anna of the goddess Ninni, and they
have carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom, and have
destroyed her statue! They have shed blood in Shapada, and they have
carried away the silver and precious stones therefrom! They have....
in Khenda, they have shed blood in the temple of Nindar in the town
of Kiab, and they have carried away the silver and the precious stones
therefrom! They have set fire to the temple of Dumuzi-abzu in the town
of Kinunir, and they have carried away the silver and the precious
stones therefrom! They have set fire to the temple of Lugaluru, and they
have carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They
have shed blood in E-engura, the temple of the goddess Ninâ, and they
have carried away the silver and the precious stones therefrom! They
have shed blood in Sag..., the temple of Amageshtin, and the silver
and the precious stones of Amageshtin have they carried away! They have
removed the grain from Ginarbaniru, the field of the god Ningirsu,
so much of it as was under cultivation! The men of Gishkhu, by the
despoiling of Shirpurla, have committed a transgression against the god
Ningirsu! The power that is come unto them, from them shall be taken
away! Of transgression on the part of Urukagina, King of Girsu, there
is none. As for Lugalzaggisi, patesi of Gishkhu, may his goddess Ni-daba
bear on her head (the weight of) this transgression!”

Such is the account, which has come down to us from the rough tablet of
some unknown scribe, of the greatest misfortune experienced by Shirpurla
during the long course of her history. Many of the great temples
mentioned in the text as among those which were burnt down and despoiled
of their treasures are referred to more than once in the votive and
historical inscriptions of earlier rulers of Shirpurla, who occupied the
throne before the ill-fated Urukagina. The names of some of them, too,
are to be found in the texts of the later pate-sis of that city, so
that it may be concluded that in course of time they were rebuilt and
restored to their former splendour. But there is no doubt that the
despoiling and partial destruction of Shirpurla in the reign of
Urukagina had a lasting effect upon the fortunes of that city, and
effectively curtailed her influence among the greater cities of Southern
Babylonia.

We may now turn our attention to the leader of the men of Gishkhu, under
whose direction they achieved their final triumph over their ancient,
and for long years more powerful, rival Shirpurla. The writer of our
tablet mentions his name in the closing words of his text when he curses
him and his goddess for the destruction and sacrilege that they have
wrought. “As for Lugalzaggisi,” he says, “patesi of Gishkhu, may his
goddess Nidaba bear on her head (the weight of ) this transgression!”
 Now the name of Lugalzaggisi has been found upon a number of fragments
of vases made of white calcite stalagmite which were discovered by Mr.
Haynes during his excavations at Nippur. All the vases were engraved
with the same inscription, so that it was possible by piecing the
fragments of text together to obtain a more or less complete copy of
the records which were originally engraved upon each of them. From
these records we learned for the first time, not only the name of
Lugalzaggisi, but the fact that he founded a powerful coalition of
cities in Babylonia at what was obviously a very early period in the
history of the country. In the text he describes himself as “King of
Erech, king of the world, the priest of Ana, the hero of Nidaba, the
son of Ukush, patesi of Gishkhu, the hero of Nidaba, the man who was
favourably regarded by the sure eye of the King of the Lands (i.e.
the god Enlil), the great patesi of Enlil, unto whom understanding was
granted by Enki, the chosen of the Sun-god, the exalted minister of
Enzu, endowed with strength by the Sun-god, the worshipper of Ninni, the
son who was conceived by Nidaba, who was nourished by Ninkharsag with
the milk of life, the attendant of Umu, priestess of Erech, the servant
who was trained by Ninâgidkhadu, the mistress of Erech, the great
minister of the gods.” Lugalzaggisi then goes on to describe the extent
of his dominion, and he says: “When the god Enlil, the lord of the
countries, bestowed upon Lugalzaggisi the kingdom of the world, and
granted unto him success in the sight of the world, when he filled the
lands with his power, and conquered them from the rising of the sun unto
the setting of the same, at that time he made straight his path from the
Lower Sea of the Tigris and Euphrates unto the Upper Sea, and he granted
him dominion over all from the rising of the sun unto the setting of the
same, so that he caused the lands to dwell in peace.”

Now when first the text of this inscription was published there existed
only vague indications of the date to be assigned to Lugalzaggisi and
the kingdom that he founded. It was clear from the titles which he bore,
that, though Gishkhu was his native place, he had extended his authority
far beyond that city and had chosen Erech as his capital. Moreover,
he claimed an empire extending from “the Lower Sea of the Tigris and
Euphrates unto the Upper Sea.” There is no doubt that the Lower Sea here
mentioned is the Persian Gulf, and it has been suggested that the Upper
Sea may be taken to be the Mediterranean, though it may possibly have
been Lake Van or Lake Urmi. But whichever of these views might be
adopted, it was clear that Lugalzaggisi was a great conqueror, and had
achieved the right to assume the high-sounding title of lugal halama,
“king of the world.” In these circumstances it was of the first
importance for the study of primitive Chaldæan history and chronology
to ascertain approximately the period at which Lugalzaggisi reigned.

The evidence on which such a question could be provisionally settled was
of the vaguest and most uncertain character, but such as it was it
had to suffice, in the absence of more reliable data. In settling all
problems connected with early Chaldæan chronology, the starting-point
was, and in fact still is, the period of Sargon I, King of Agade,
inasmuch as the date of his reign is settled, according to the reckoning
of the scribes of Nabonidus, as about 3800 B.C. It is true that this
date has been called in question, and ingenious suggestions for amending
it have been made by some writers, while others have rejected it
altogether, holding that it merely represented a guess on the part of
the late Babylonians and could be safely ignored in the chronological
schemes which they brought forward. But nearly every fresh discovery
made in the last few years has tended to confirm some point in the
traditions current among the later Babylonians with regard to the
earlier history of their country. Consequently, reliance may be placed
with increased confidence on the truth of such traditions as a
whole, and we may continue to accept those statements which yet await
confirmation from documents more nearly contemporary with the early
period to which they refer. It is true that such a date as that assigned
by Nabonidus to Sargon is not to be regarded as absolutely fixed, for
Nabonidus is obviously speaking in round numbers, and we may allow for
some minor inaccuracies in the calculations of his scribes. But it is
certain that the later Babylonian priests and scribes had a wealth of
historical material at their disposal which has not come down to us. We
may therefore accept the date given by Nabonidus for Sargon of Agade
and his son Narâm-Sin as approximately accurate, and this is also the
opinion of the majority of writers on early Babylonian history.

The diggings at Nippur furnished indications that certain inscriptions
found on that site and written in a very archaic form of script were
to be assigned to a period earlier than that of Sargon. One class of
evidence was obtained from a careful study of the different levels at
which the inscriptions and the remains of buildings were found. At a
comparatively deep level in the mound inscriptions of Sargon himself
were recovered, along with bricks stamped with the name of Narâm-Sin,
his son. It was, therefore, a reasonable conclusion roughly to date the
particular stratum in which these objects were found to the period of
the empire established by Sargon, with its centre at Agade. Later on
excavations were carried to a lower level, and remains of buildings
were discovered which appeared to belong to a still earlier period
of civilization. An altar was found standing in a small enclosure
surrounded by a kind of curb. Near by were two immense clay vases which
appeared to have been placed on a ramp or inclined plane leading up to
the altar, and remains were also found of a massive brick building in
which was an arch of brick. No inscriptions were actually found at this
level, but in the upper level assigned to Sargon were a number of texts
which might very probably be assigned to the pre-Sargonic period. None
of these were complete, and they had the appearance of having been
intentionally broken into small fragments. There was therefore something
to be said for the theory that they might have been inscribed by the
builders of the construction in the lowest levels of the mound, and that
they were destroyed and scattered by some conqueror who had laid their
city in ruins.

But all such evidence derived from noting the levels at which
inscriptions are found is in its nature extremely uncertain and liable
to many different interpretations, especially if the strata show signs
of having been disturbed. Where a pavement or building is still intact,
with the inscribed bricks of the builder remaining in their original
positions, conclusions may be confidently drawn with regard to the age
of the building and its relative antiquity to the strata above and below
it. But the strata in the lowest levels at Nippur, as we have seen, were
not in this condition, and such evidence as they furnished could only be
accepted if confirmed by independent data. Such confirmation was to be
found by examination of the early inscriptions themselves.

It has been remarked that most of them were broken into small pieces,
as though by some invader of the country; but this was not the case with
certain gate-sockets and great blocks of diorite which were too hard
and big to be easily broken. Moreover, any conqueror of a city would be
unlikely to spend time and labour in destroying materials which might
be usefully employed in the construction of other buildings which he
himself might erect. Stone could not be obtained in the alluvial plains
of Babylonia and had to be quarried in the mountains and brought great
distances.

[Illustration: 188.jpg STONE GATE]

     Socket Bearing An Inscription of Uk-Engur, An Early King
     of The City Of Ur. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

From any building of his predecessors which he razed to the ground, an
invader would therefore remove the gate-sockets and blocks of stone for
his own use, supposing he contemplated building on the site. If he left
the city in ruins and returned to his own country, some subsequent king,
when clearing the ruined site for building operations, might come across
the stones, and he would not leave them buried, but would use them for
his own construction. And this is what actually did happen in the case
of some of the building materials of one of these early kings, from the
lower strata of Nippur. Certain of the blocks which bore the name of
Lugalkigubnidudu had been used again by Sargon, King of Agade, who
engraved his own name upon them without obliterating the name of the
former king.

It followed that Lugalkigubnidudu belonged to the pre-Sargonic period,
and, although the same conclusive evidence was not forthcoming in the
case of Lugalzag-gisi, he also without much hesitation was set in
this early period, mainly on the strength of the archaic forms of the
characters employed in his inscriptions. In fact, they were held to be
so archaic that, not only was he said to have reigned before Sargon of
Agade, but he was set in the very earliest period of Chaldæan history,
and his empire was supposed to have been contemporaneous with the very
earliest rulers of Shirpurla. The new inscription found by Captain
Cros will cause this opinion to be considerably modified. While it
corroborates the view that Lugalzaggisi is to be set in the pre-Sargonic
period, it proves that he lived and reigned very shortly before him. As
we have already seen, he was the contemporary of Urukagina, who belongs
to the middle period of the history of Shirpurla. Lugalzaggisi’s capture
and sack of the city of Shirpurla was only one of a number of conquests
which he achieved. His father Ukush had been merely patesi of the city
of Gish-khu, but he himself was not content with the restricted sphere
of authority which such a position implied, and he eventually succeeded
in enforcing his authority over the greater part of Babylonia. From
the fact that he styles himself King of Erech, we may conclude that
he removed his capital from Ukush to that city, after having probably
secured its submission by force of arms. In fact, his title of “king of
the world” can only have been won as the result of many victories, and
Captain Cros’s tablet gives us a glimpse of the methods by which he
managed to secure himself against the competition of any rival. The
capture of Shirpurla must have been one of his earliest achievements,
for its proximity to Gish-khu rendered its reduction a necessary
prelude to any more extensive plan of conquest. But the kingdom which
Lugalzaggisi founded cannot have endured long.

Under Sargon of Agade, the Semites gained the upper hand in Babylonia,
and Erech, Grishkhu, and Shirpurla, as well as the other ancient cities
in the land, fell in turn under his domination and formed part of the
extensive empire which he ruled.

Concerning the later rulers of city-states of Babylonia which succeeded
the disruption of the empire founded by Sargon of Agade and consolidated
by Narâm-Sin, his son, the excavations have little to tell us which has
not already been made use of by Prof. Maspero in his history of this
period.*

     * The tablets found at Telloh by the late M. de Sarzec, and
     published during his lifetime, fall into two main classes,
     which date from different periods in early Chaldæan
     history. The great majority belong to the period when the
     city of Ur held pre-eminence among the cities of Southern
     Babylonia, and they are dated in the reigns of Dungi, Bur-
     Sin, Gamil-Sin, and Ine-Sin. The other and smaller
     collection belongs to the earlier period of Sargon and
     Narâm-Sin; while many of the tablets found in M. de Sarzec’s
     last diggings, which were published after his death, are to
     be set in the great gap between these two periods. Some of
     those recently discovered, which belong to the period of
     Dungi, contain memoranda concerning the supply of food for
     the maintenance of officials stopping at Shirpurla in the
     course of journeys in Babylonia and Elam, and they throw an
     interesting light on the close and constant communication
     which took place at this time between the great cities of
     Mesopotamia and the neighbouring countries.

[Illustration: 190.jpg STATUE OF GUDEA.]

     The most famous of the later patesis, or viceroys, of
     Shirpurla, the Sumerian city in Southern Babylonia now
     marked by the mounds of Telloh. Photograph by Messrs.
     Mansell & Co.

Ur, Isin, and,Larsam succeeded one another in the position of leading
city in Babylonia, holding Mppur, Eridu, Erech, Shirpurla, and the other
chief cities in a condition of semi-dependence upon themselves. We may
note that the true reading of the name of the founder of the dynasty
of Ur has now been ascertained from a syllabary to be Ur-Engur; and an
unpublished chronicle in the British Museum relates that his son Dungi
cared greatly for the city of Eridu, but sacked Babylon and carried off
its spoil, together with the treasures from E-sagila, the great temple
of Marduk. Such episodes must have been common at this period when each
city was striving for hegemony. Meanwhile, Shirpurla remained the centre
of Sumerian influence in Babylonia, and her patesis were content to owe
allegiance to so powerful a ruler as Dungi, King of Ur, while at all
times exercising complete authority within their own jurisdiction.

During the most recent diggings that have been carried out at Telloh a
find of considerable value to the history of Sumerian art has been
made. The find is also of great general interest, since it enables us
to identify a portrait of Gudea, the most famous of the later Sumerian
patesis. In the course of excavating the Tell of Tablets Captain Cros
found a little seated statue made of diorite. It was not found in place,
but upside down, and appeared to have been thrown with other débris
scattered in that portion of the mound. On lifting it from the trench it
was seen that the head of the statue was broken off, as is the case
with all the other statues of Gudea found at Telloh. The statue bore an
inscription of Gudea, carefully executed and well preserved, but it
was smaller than other statues of the same ruler that had been
already recovered, and the absence of the head thus robbed it of any
extraordinary interest. On its arrival at the Louvre, M. Léon Heuzey was
struck by its general resemblance to a Sumerian head of diorite formerly
discovered by M. de Sarzec at Telloh, which has been preserved in the
Louvre for many years. On applying the head to the newly found statue,
it was found to fit it exactly, and to complete the monument, and we
are thus enabled to identify the features of Gudea. Prom a photographic
reproduction of this statue, it is seen that the head is larger than
it should be, in proportion to the body, a characteristic which is also
apparent in a small Sumerian statue preserved in the British Museum.

[Illustration: 192.jpg TABLET INSCRIBED IN SUMERIAN WITH DETAILS OF A
SURVEY OF CERTAIN PROPERTY.]

     Probably situated in the neighbourhood of Telloh. The
     circular shape is very unusual, and appears to have been
     used only for survey-tablets. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell
     & Co.

Gudea caused many statues of himself to be made out of the hard diorite
which he brought for that purpose from the Sinaitic peninsula, and from
the inscriptions preserved upon them it is possible to ascertain the
buildings in which they were originally placed. Thus one of the statues
previously found was set up in the temple of Ninkharsag, two others in
E-ninnû, the temple of the god Ningirsu, three more in the temple of the
goddess Bau, one in E-anna, the temple of the goddess Ninni, and another
in the temple of Gatumdug. The newly found statue of the king was made
to be set up in the temple erected by Gudea at Girsu in honour of the
god Ningishzida, as is recorded in the inscription engraved on the front
of the king’s robe, which reads as follows:

“In the day when the god Ningirsu, the strong warrior of Enlil, granted
unto the god Ningishzida, the son of Ninâzu, the beloved of the gods,
(the guardianship of) the foundation of the city and of the hills and
valleys, on that day Gudea, patesi of Shirpurla, the just man who
loveth his god, who for his master Ningirsu hath constructed his temple
E-ninnu, called the shining Imgig, and his temple E-pa, the temple
of-the seven zones of heaven, and for the goddess Ninâ, the queen, his
lady, hath constructed the temple Sirara-shum, which riseth higher than
(all) the temples in the world, and hath constructed their temples for
the great gods of Lagash, built for his god Ningishzida his temple in
Girsu. Whosoever shall proclaim the god Ningirsu as his god, even as
I proclaim him, may he do no harm unto the temple of my god! May he
proclaim the name of this temple! May that man be my friend, and may he
proclaim my name! Gudea hath made the statue, and ‘Unto - Gudea - the
- builder - of - the - temple - hath life-been-given hath he called its
name, and he hath brought it into the temple.”

The long name which Gudea gave to the statue, “Unto - Gudea - the -
builder - of - the - temple - hath - life-been-given,” is characteristic
of the practice of the Sumerian patesis, who always gave long and
symbolical names to statues, stelae, and sacred objects dedicated and
set up in their temples. The occasion on which the temple was built, and
this statue erected within it, seems to have been the investiture of
the god Ningishzida with special and peculiar powers, and it possibly
inaugurated his introduction into the pantheon of Shirpurla. Ningishzida
is called in the inscription the son of Ninazu, who was the husband of
the Queen of the Underworld.

In one of his aspects he was therefore probably a god of the underworld
himself, and it is in this character that he was appointed by Ningirsu
as guardian of the city’s foundations. But “the hills and valleys”
 (i.e. the open country) were also put under his jurisdiction, so that
in another aspect he was a god of vegetation. It is therefore not
improbable that, like the god Dumuzi, or Tammuz, he was supposed to
descend into the underworld in winter, ascending to the surface of the
earth with the earliest green shoots of vegetation in the spring.*

     * Cf. Thureau-Dangin, Rev. d’Assyr., vol. vi. (1904), p. 24.

A most valuable contribution has recently been made to our knowledge of
Sumerian religion and of the light in which these early rulers regarded
the cult and worship of their gods, by the complete interpretation of
the long texts inscribed upon the famous cylinders of Gudea, the patesi
of Shirpurla, which have been preserved for many years in the Louvre.
These two great cylinders of baked clay were discovered by the late M.
de Sarzec so long ago as the year 1877, during the first period of his
diggings at Telloh, and, although the general nature of their contents
has long been recognized, no complete translation of the texts inscribed
upon them had been published until a few months ago. M. Thureau-Dangin,
who has made the early Sumerian texts his special study, has devoted
himself to their interpretation for some years past, and he has just
issued the first part of his monograph upon them. In view of the
importance of the texts and of the light they throw upon the religious
beliefs and practices of the early Sumerians, a somewhat detailed
account of their contents may here be given.

The occasion on which the cylinders were made was the rebuilding by
Gudea of E-ninnû, the great temple of the god Ningirsu, in the city of
Shirpurla. The two cylinders supplement one another, one of them having
been inscribed while the work of construction was still in progress, the
other after the completion of the temple, when the god Ningirsu had been
installed within his shrine with due pomp and ceremony. It would appear
that Southern Babylonia had been suffering from a prolonged drought, and
that the water in the rivers and canals had fallen, so that the crops
had suffered and the country was threatened with famine. Gudea was at a
loss to know by what means he might restore prosperity to his country,
when one night he had a dream, and it was in consequence of this dream
that he eventually erected one of the most sumptuously appointed of
Sumerian temples. By this means he secured the return of Ningirsu’s
favour and that of the other gods, and his country once more enjoyed the
blessings of peace and prosperity.

In the opening words of the first of his cylinders Gudea describes how
the great gods themselves took counsel and decreed that he should build
the temple of E-ninnû and thereby restore to his city the supply of
water it had formerly enjoyed. He records that on the day on which the
destinies were fixed in heaven and upon earth, Enlil, the chief of the
gods, and Ningirsu, the city-god of Shirpurla, held converse. And Enlil,
turning to Ningirsu, said: “In my city that which is fitting is not
done. The stream doth not rise. The stream of Enlil doth not rise. The
high waters shine not, neither do they show their splendour. The stream
of Enlil bringeth not good water like the Tigris. Let the King (i.e.
Ningirsu) therefore proclaim the temple. Let the decrees of the temple
E-ninnû be made illustrious in heaven and upon earth!” The great gods
did not communicate their orders directly to Gudea, but conveyed their
wishes to him by means of a dream. And while the patesi slept a vision
of the night came to him, and he beheld a man whose stature was so great
that it equalled the heavens and the earth. And by the crown he wore
upon his head Gudea knew that the figure must be a god. And by his side
was the divine eagle, the emblem of Shirpurla, and his feet rested upon
the whirlwind, and a lion was crouching upon his right hand and upon his
left. And the figure spoke to the patesi, but he did not understand the
meaning of the words. Then it seemed to Gudea that the sun rose from
the earth and he beheld a woman holding in her hand a pure reed, and she
carried also a tablet on which was a star of the heavens, and she seemed
to take counsel with herself. And while Gudea was gazing he seemed to
see a second man who was like a warrior; and he carried a slab of lapis
lazuli and on it he drew out the plan of a temple. And before the patesi
himself it seemed that a fair cushion was placed, and upon the cushion
was set a mould, and within the mould was a brick, the brick of destiny.
And on the right hand the patesi beheld an ass which lay upon the
ground.

Such was the dream which Gudea beheld in a vision of the night, and he
was troubled because he could not interpret it. So he decided to go
to the goddess Ninâ, who could divine all mysteries of the gods, and
beseech her to tell him the meaning of the vision. But before applying
to the goddess for her help, he thought it best to secure the mediation
of the god Ningirsu and the goddess Gatumdug, in order that they should
use their influence with Ninâ to induce her to reveal the interpretation
of the dream. So the patesi set out to the temple of Ningirsu, and,
having offered a sacrifice and poured out fresh water, he prayed to the
god that his sister, Ninâ, the child of Eridu, might be prevailed upon
to give him help. And the god hearkened to his prayer. Then Gudea made
offerings, and before the sleeping-chamber of the goddess Gatumdug he
offered a sacrifice and poured out fresh water. And he prayed to the
goddess, calling her his queen and the child of the pure heaven, who
gave life to the countries and befriended and preserved the people or
the man on whom she looked with favour.

“I have no mother,” cried Gudea, “but thou art my mother! I have no
father, but thou art a father to me!” And the goddess Gatumdug gave
ear to the patesi’s prayer. Thus encouraged by her favour and that of
Ningirsu, Gudea set out for the temple of the goddess Ninâ.

On his arrival at the temple, the patesi offered a sacrifice and poured
out fresh water, as he had already done when approaching the presence of
Ningirsu and Gatumdug. And he prayed to Ninâ, as the goddess who divines
the secrets of the gods, beseeching her to interpret the vision that had
been sent to him; and he then recounted to her the details of his dream.
When the patesi had finished his story, the goddess addressed him and
told him that she would explain the meaning of his dream to him. And
this was the interpretation of the dream. The man whose stature was so
great that it equalled the heavens and the earth, whose head was that
of a god, at whose side was the divine eagle, whose feet rested on the
whirlwind, while a lion couched on his right hand and on his left, was
her brother, the god Ningirsu. And the words which he uttered were an
order to the patesi that he should build the temple E-ninnû. And the sun
which rose from the earth before the patesi was the god Ningishzida,
for like the sun he goes forth from the earth. And the maiden who held
a pure reed in her hand, and carried the tablet with the star, was her
sister, the goddess Nidaba: the star was the pure star of the temple’s
construction, which she proclaimed. And the second man, who was like a
warrior and carried the slab of lapis lazuli, was the god Nindub, and the
plan of the temple which he drew was the plan of E-ninnû. And the brick
which rested in its mould upon the cushion was the sacred brick of
E-ninnû. And as for the ass which lay upon the ground, that, the goddess
said, was the patesi himself.

Having interpreted the meaning of the dream, the goddess Ninâ proceeded
to give Gudea instruction as to how he should go to work to build the
temple. She told him first of all to go to his treasure-house and bring
forth his treasures from their sealed cases, and out of these to make
certain offerings which he was to place near the god Ningirsu, in the
temple in which he was dwelling at that time. The offerings were to
consist of a chariot, adorned with pure metal and precious stones;
bright arrows in a quiver; the weapon of the god, his sacred emblem, on
which Gudea was to inscribe his own name; and finally a lyre, the music
of which was wont to soothe the god when he took counsel with himself.
Ninâ added that if the patesi carried out her instructions and made the
offerings she had specified, Ningirsu would reveal to him the plan on
which the temple was to be built, and would also bless him. Gudea bowed
himself down in token of his submission to the commands of the goddess,
and proceeded to execute them forthwith. He brought out his treasures,
and from the precious woods and metals which he possessed his craftsmen
fashioned the objects he was to present, and he set them in Ningirsu’s
temple near to the god. He worked day and night, and, having prepared a
suitable spot in the precincts of the temple at the place of judgment,
he spread out upon it as offerings a fat sheep and a kid and the skin of
a young female kid. Then he built a fire of cypress and cedar and other
aromatic woods, to make a sweet savour, and, entering the inner chamber
of the temple, he offered a prayer to Ningirsu. He said that he wished
to build the temple, but he had received no sign that this was the will
of the god, and he prayed for a sign.

While he prayed the patesi was stretched out upon the ground, and the
god, standing near his head, then answered him. He said that he who
should build his temple was none other than Gudea, and that he would
give him the sign for which he asked. But first he described the plan
on which the temple was to be built, naming its various shrines and
chambers and describing the manner in which they were to be fashioned
and adorned. And the god promised that when Gudea should build the
temple, the land would once more enjoy abundance, for Ningirsu would
send a wind which should proclaim to the heavens the return of the
waters. And on that day the waters would fall from the heavens, the
water in the ditches and canals would rise, and water would gush out
from the dry clefts in the ground. And the great fields would once
more produce their crops, and oil would be poured out plenteously in
Sumer[sp.] and wool would again be weighed in great abundance. In that
day the god would go to the mountain where dwelt the whirlwind, and he
would himself direct the wind which should give the land the breath of
life. Gudea must therefore work day and night at the task of building
the temple. One company of men was to relieve another at its toil, and
during the night the men were to kindle lights so that the plain should
be as bright as day. Thus the builders would build continuously. Men
were also to be sent to the mountains to cut down cedars and pines and
other trees and bring their trunks to the city, while masons were to go
to the mountains and were to cut and transport huge blocks of stone to
be used in the construction of the temple. Finally the god gave Gudea
the sign for which he asked. The sign was that he should feel his side
touched as by a flame, and thereby he should know that he was the man
chosen by Ningirsu to carry out his commands.

Gudea bowed his head in submission, and his first act was to consult the
omens, and the omens were favourable. He then proceeded to purify the
city by special rites, so that the mother when angered did not chide her
son, and the master did not strike his servant’s head, and the mistress,
though provoked by her handmaid, did not smite her face. And Gudea drove
all the evil wizards and sorcerers from the city, and he purified and
sanctified the city completely. Then he kindled a great fire of cedar
and other aromatic woods, to make a sweet savour for the gods, and
prayers were offered day and night; and the patesi addressed a prayer
to the Anun-naki, or Spirits of the Earth, who dwelt in Shirpurla,
and assigned a place to them in the temple. Then, having completed
his purification of the city itself, he consecrated its immediate
surroundings. Thus he consecrated the district of Gu-edin, whence the
revenues of Ningirsu were derived, and the lands of the goddess Ninâ
with their populous villages. And he consecrated the wild and savage
bulls which no man could turn aside, and the cedars which were sacred
to Ningirsu, and the cattle of the plains. And he consecrated the armed
men, and the famous warriors, and the warriors of the Sun-god. And the
emblems of the god Ningirsu, and of the two great goddesses, Ninâ and
Ninni, he installed before them in their shrines.

Then Gudea sent far and wide to fetch materials for the construction of
the temple. And the Elamite came from Elani, and men of Susa came from
Susa, and men brought wood from the mountains of Sinai and Melukh-kha.
And into the mountain of cedars, where no man before had penetrated,
the patesi cut a road, and he brought cedars and beams of other precious
woods in great quantities to the city. And he also made a road into the
mountain where stone was quarried, into places where no man before had
penetrated. And he carried great blocks of stone down from the mountain
and loaded them into barges and brought them to the city. And the barges
brought bitumen and plaster, and they were loaded as though they were
carrying grain, and all manner of great things were brought to the
city. Copper ore was brought from the mountain of copper in the land of
Kimash, and gold was brought in powder from the mountains, and silver
was brought from the mountains and porphyry from the land of Melukhkha,
and marble from the mountain of marble. And the patesi installed
goldsmiths and silversmiths, who wrought in these precious metals, for
the adornment of the temple; and he brought smiths who worked in copper
and lead, who were priests of Nin-tu-kalama. In his search for fitting
materials for the building of the temple, Gudea journeyed from the lower
country to the upper country, and from the upper country to the lower
country he returned.

The only other materials now wanting for the construction of the temple
were the sun-dried bricks of clay, of which the temple platform and
the structure of the temple itself were in the main composed. Their
manufacture was now inaugurated by a symbolical ceremony carried out by
the patesi in person. At dawn he performed an ablution with the fitting
rites that accompanied it, and when the day was more advanced he slew
a bull and a kid as sacrifices, and he then entered the temple of
Ningirsu, where he prostrated himself. And he took the sacred mould
and the fair cushion on which it rested in the temple, and he poured a
libation into the mould. Afterwards, having made offerings of honey and
butter, and having burnt incense, he placed the cushion and the mould
upon his head and carried it to the appointed place. There he placed
clay in the mould, shaping it into a brick, and he left the brick in its
mould within the temple. And last of all he sprinkled oil of cedar-wood
around.

The next day at dawn Gudea broke the mould and set the brick in the sun.
And the Sun-god was rejoiced at the brick that he had fashioned. And
Gudea took the brick and raised it on high towards the heavens, and he
carried the brick to his people. In this way the patesi inaugurated the
manufacture of the sun-dried bricks for the temple, the sacred brick
which he had made being the symbol and pattern of the innumerable bricks
to be used in its construction. He then marked out the plan of the
temple, and the text states that he devoted himself to the building of
the temple like a young man who has begun building a house and allows
no pleasure to interfere with his task. And he chose out skilled workmen
and employed them on the building, and he was filled with joy. The gods,
too, are stated to have helped with the building, for Enki fixed the
temennu of the temple, and the goddess Ninâ looked after its oracles,
and Gatumdug, the mother of Shir-purla, fashioned bricks for it morning
and evening, while the goddess Bau sprinkled aromatic oil of cedar-wood.
Gudea himself laid its foundations, and as he did so he blessed the
temple seven times, comparing it to the sacred brick, to the holy
libation-vase, to the divine eagle of Shirpurla, to a terrible couching
panther, to the beautiful heavens, to the day of offerings, and to the
morning light which brightens the land. He caused the temple to rise
towards heaven like a mountain, or like a cedar growing in the desert.
He built it of bricks of Sumer, and the timbers which he set in place
were as strong as the dragon of the deep.

While he was engaged on the building Gudea took counsel of the god Enki,
and he built a fountain for the gods, where they might drink. With the
great stones which he had brought and fashioned he built a reservoir
and a basin for the temple. And seven of the great stones he set up as
stelæ, and he gave them favourable names. The text then recounts
the various parts and shrines of the temple, and it describes their
splendours in similes drawn from the heavens and the earth and the
abyss, or deep, beneath the earth. The temple itself is described as,
being like the crescent of the new moon, or like the sun in the midst
of the stars, or like a mountain of lapis lazuli, or like a mountain of
shining marble. Parts of it are said to have been terrible and strong as
a savage bull, or a lion, or the antelope of the abyss, or the monster
Lakhamu who dwells in the abyss, or the sacred leopard that inspires
terror. One of the doors of the temple was guarded by a figure of the
hero who slew the monster with six heads, and at another door was a good
dragon, and at another a lion; opposite the city were set figures of
the seven heroes, and facing the rising sun was fixed the emblem of the
Sun-god. Figures of other heroes and favourable monsters were set up as
guardians of other portions of the temple. The fastenings of the main
entrance were decorated with dragons shooting out their tongues, and the
bolt of the great door was fashioned like a raging hound.

After this description of the construction and adornment of the
temple the text goes on to narrate how Gudea arranged for its material
endowment. He stalled oxen and sheep, for sacrifice and feasting, in the
outhouses and pens within the temple precincts, and he heaped up grain
in its granaries. Its storehouses he filled with spices so that
they were like the Tigris when its waters are in flood, and in its
treasure-chambers he piled up precious stones, and silver, and lead in
abundance. Within the temple precincts he planted a sacred garden which
was like a mountain covered with vines; and on the terrace he built
a great reservoir, or tank, lined with lead, in addition to the great
stone reservoir within the temple itself. He constructed a special
dwelling-place for the sacred doves, and among the flowers of the temple
garden and under the shade of the great trees the birds of heaven flew
about unmolested.

The first of the two great cylinders of Gudea ends at this point in the
description of the temple, and it is evident that its text was composed
while the work of building was still in progress. Moreover, the writing
of the cylinder was finished before the actual work of building the
temple was completed, for the last column of the text concludes with a
prayer to Ningirsu to make it glorious during the progress of the work,
the prayer ending with the words, “O Ningirsu, glorify it! Glorify the
temple of Ningirsu during its construction!” The text of the second of
the two great cylinders is shorter than that of the first, consisting
of twenty-four instead of thirty columns of writing, and it was composed
and written after the temple was completed. Like the first of the
cylinders, it concludes with a prayer to Ningirsu on behalf of the
temple, ending with the similar refrain, “O Ningirsu, glorify it!
Glorify the temple of Ningirsu after its construction!” The first
cylinder, as we have seen, records how it came about that Gudea decided
to rebuild the temple E-ninnû in honour of Ningirsu. It describes how,
when the land was suffering from drought and famine, Gudea had a dream,
how Ninâ interpreted the dream to mean that he must rebuild the temple,
and how Ningirsu himself promised that this act of piety would restore
abundance and prosperity to the land. Its text ends with the long
description of the sumptuous manner in which the patesi carried out the
work, the most striking points of which we have just summarized. The
narrative of the second cylinder begins at the moment when the building
of the temple was finished, and when all was ready for the great god
Nin-girsu to be installed therein, and its text is taken up with a
description of the ceremonies and rites with which this solemn function
was carried out. It presents us with a picture, drawn from life, of the
worship and cult of the ancient Sumerians in actual operation. In view
of its importance from the point of view of the study and comparison of
the Sumerian and Babylonian religious systems, its contents also may be
summarized. We will afterwards discuss briefly the information furnished
by both the cylinders on the Sumerian origin of many of the religious
beliefs and practices which were current among the later Semitic
inhabitants of Babylonia and Assyria.

When Gudea had finished building the new temple of E-ninnû, and had
completed the decoration and adornment of its shrines, and had planted
its gardens and stocked its treasure-chambers and storehouses, he
applied himself to the preliminary ceremonies and religious preparations
which necessarily preceded the actual function of transferring the
statue of the god Ningirsu from his old temple to his new one. Gudea’s
first act was to install the Anunnaki, or Spirits of the Earth, in the
new temple, and when he had done this, and had supplied additional
sheep for their sacrifices and food in abundance for their offerings, he
prayed to them to give him their assistance and to pronounce a prayer at
his side when he should lead Ningirsu into his new dwelling-place.
The text then describes how Gudea went to the old temple of Ningirsu,
accompanied by his protecting spirits who walked before him and behind
him. Into the old temple he carried sumptuous offerings, and when he
had set them before the god, he addressed him in prayer and said: “O
my King, Ningirsu! O Lord, who curbest the raging waters! O Lord, whose
word surpasseth all others! O Son of Enlil, O warrior, what commands
shall I faithfully carry out? O Ningirsu, I have built thy temple, and
with joy would I lead thee therein, and my goddess Bau would install at
thy side.” We are told that the god accepted Gudea’s prayer, and thereby
he gave his consent to be removed from the old temple of E-ninnû to his
new one which bore the same name.

But the ceremony of the god’s removal was not carried out at once, for
the due time had not arrived. The year ended, and the new year came,
and then “the month of the temple” began. The third day of the month
was that appointed for the installation of Ningirsu. Gudea meanwhile had
sprinkled the ground with oil, and set out offerings of honey and butter
and wine, and grain mixed with milk, and dates, and food untouched
by fire, to serve as food for the gods; and the gods themselves had
assisted in the preparations for the reception of Ningirsu. The god
Asaru made ready the temple itself, and Ninmada performed the ceremony
of purification. The god Enki issued oracles, and the god Nindub, the
supreme priest of Eridu, brought incense. Ninâ performed chants within
the temple, and brought black sheep and holy cows to its folds and
stalls. This record of the help given by the other gods we may interpret
as meaning that the priests attached to the other great Sumerian
temples took part in the preparation of the new temple, and added their
offerings to the temple stores. To many of the gods, also, special
shrines within the temple were assigned.

When the purification of E-ninnû was completed and the way between
the old temple and the new made ready, all the inhabitants of the city
prostrated themselves on the ground. “The city,” says Gudea, “was like
the mother of a sick man who prepareth a potion for him, or like the
cattle of the plain which lie down together, or like the fierce lion,
the master of the plain, when he coucheth.” During the day and the night
before the ceremony of removal, prayers and supplications were uttered,
and at the first light of dawn on the appointed day the god Ningirsu
went into his new temple “like a whirlwind,” the goddess Bau entering
at his side “like the sun rising over Shirpurla.” She entered beside his
couch, like a faithful wife, whose cares are for her own household, and
she dwelt beside his ear and bestowed abundance upon Shirpurla.

As the day began to brighten and the sun rose, Gudea set out as
offerings in the temple a fat ox and a fat sheep, and he brought a vase
of lead and filled it with wine, which he poured out as a libation, and
he performed incantations. Then, having duly established Ningirsu and
Bau in the chief shrine, he turned his attention to the lesser gods and
installed them in their appointed places in the temple, where they would
be always ready to assist Ningirsu in the temple ceremonies and in the
issue of his decrees for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
Thus he established the god Galalim, the son of Ningirsu, in a chosen
spot in the great court in front of the temple, where, under the orders
of his father, he should direct the just and curb the evil-doer; he
would also by his presence strengthen and preserve the temple, while
his special duty was to guard the throne of destiny and, on behalf of
Ningirsu, to place the sceptre in the hands of the reigning patesi.
Near to Ningirsu and under his orders Gudea also established the god
Dunshaga, whose function it was to sanctify the temple and to look after
its libations and offerings, and to see to the due performance of the
ceremonies of ablution. This god would offer water to Ningirsu with a
pure hand, he would pour out libations of wine and strong drink, and
would tend the oxen, sheep, kids, and other offerings which were brought
to the temple night and day. To the god Lugalkurdub, who was also
installed in the temple, was assigned the privilege of holding in his
hand the mace with the seven heads, and it was his duty to open the door
of the Gate of Combat. He guarded the sacred weapons of Ningirsu and
destroyed the countries of his enemies. He was Ningirsu’s chief leader
in battle, and another god with lesser powers was associated with him as
his second leader.

Ningirsu’s counsellor was the god Lugalsisa, and he also had his
appointed place in E-ninnû. It was his duty to receive the prayers
of Shirpurla and render them propitious; he superintended and blessed
Ningirsu’s journey when he visited Eridu or returned from that city,
and he made special intercessions for the life of Gudea. The minister of
Ningirsu’s harîm was the god Shakanshabar, and he was installed near to
Nin-girsu that he might issue his commands, both great and small. The
keeper of the harîm was the god Urizu, and it was his duty to purify the
water and sanctify the grain, and he tended Ningirsu’s sleeping-chamber
and saw that all was arranged therein as was fitting. The driver of
Ningirsu’s chariot was the god Ensignun; it was his duty to keep the
sacred chariot as bright as the stars of heaven, and morning and evening
to tend and feed Ningirsu’s sacred ass, called Ug-kash, and the ass
of Eridu. The shepherd of Ningirsu’s kids was the god Enlulim, and he
tended the sacred she-goat who suckled the kids, and he guarded her so
that the serpent should not steal her milk. This god also looked
after the oil and the strong drink of E-ninnû, and saw that its store
increased.

Ningirsu’s beloved musician was the god Ushum-gabkalama, and he was
installed in E-ninnû that he might take his flute and fill the temple
court with joy. It was his privilege to play to Ningirsu as he listened
in his harîm, and to render the life of the god pleasant in E-ninnû.
Ningirsu’s singer was the god Lugaligi-khusham, and he had his appointed
place in E-ninnû, for he could appease the heart and soften anger; he
could stop the tears which flowed from weeping eyes, and could lessen
sorrow in the sighing heart. Gudea also installed in E-ninnû the seven
twin-daughters of the goddess Bau, all virgins, whom Ningirsu had
begotten. Their names were Zarzaru, Impaë, Urenuntaëa, Khegir-nuna,
Kheshaga, Gurmu, and Zarmu. Gudea installed them near their father that
they might offer favourable prayers.

The cultivator of the district of Gu-edin was the god Gishbare, and he
was installed in the temple that he might cause the great fields to be
fertile, and might make the wheat glisten in Gu-edin, the plain assigned
to Ningirsu for his revenues. It was this god’s duty also to tend the
machines for irrigation, and to raise the water into the canals and
ditches of Shirpurla, and thus to keep the city’s granaries well filled.
The god Kal was the guardian of the fishing in Gu-edin, and his chief
duty was to place fish in the sacred pools. The steward of Gu-edin was
the god Dimgalabzu, whose duty it was to keep the plain in good order,
so that the birds might abound there and the beasts might raise their
young in peace; he also guarded the special privilege, which the plain
enjoyed, of freedom from any tax levied upon the increase of the
cattle pastured there. Last of all Gudea installed in E-ninnû the god
Lugalenurua-zagakam, who looked after the construction of houses in the
city and the building of fortresses upon the city wall; in the temple it
was his privilege to raise on high a battle-axe made of cedar.

All these lesser deities, having close relations to the god Ningirsu,
were installed by Gudea in his temple in close proximity to him, that
they might be always ready to perform their special functions. But the
greater deities also had their share in the inauguration of the temple,
and of these Gudea specially mentions Ana, Enlil, Ninkharsag, Enki, and
Enzu, who all assisted in rendering the temple’s lot propitious. For at
least three of the greater gods (Ana, Enlil, and the goddess Nin-makh)
Gudea erected shrines near one another and probably within the temple’s
precincts, and, as the passage which records this fact is broken, it is
possible that the missing portion of the text recorded the building of
shrines to other deities. In any case, it is clear that the composer
of the text represents all the great gods as beholding the erection and
inauguration of Ningirsu’s new temple with favour.

After the account of the installation of Ningirsu, and his spouse Bau,
and his attendant deities, the text records the sumptuous offerings
which Gudea placed within Ningirsu’s shrine. These included another
chariot drawn by an ass, a seven-headed battle-axe, a sword with nine
emblems, a bow with terrible arrows and a quiver decorated with wild
beasts and dragons shooting out their tongues, and a bed which was
set within the god’s sleeping-chamber. On the couch in the shrine the
goddess Bau reclined beside her lord Ningirsu, and ate of the great
victims which were sacrificed in their honour.

When the ceremony of installation had been successfully performed, Gudea
rested, and for seven days he feasted with his people. During this time
the maid was the equal of her mistress, and master and servant consorted
together as friends. The powerful and the humble man lay down side by
side, and in place of evil speech only propitious words were heard. The
rich man did not wrong the orphan and the strong man did not oppress the
widow. The laws of Ninâ and Ningirsu were observed, justice was bright
in the sunlight, and the Sun-god trampled iniquity under foot. The
building of the temple also restored material prosperity to the land,
for the canals became full of water and fish swarmed in the pools, the
granaries were filled with grain and the flocks and herds brought forth
their increase. The city of Shirpurla was satiated with abundance.

Such is a summary of the account which Gudea has left us of his
rebuilding of the temple E-ninnû, of the reasons which led him to
undertake the work, and of the results which followed its completion. It
has often been said that the inscriptions of the ancient Sumerians are
without much intrinsic value, that they mainly consist of dull votive
formulæ, and that for general interest the best of them cannot be
compared with the later inscriptions of the Semitic inhabitants
of Mesopotamia. This reproach, for which until recently there was
considerable justification, has been finally removed by the working
out of the texts upon Gudea’s cylinders. For picturesque narrative, for
wealth of detail, and for striking similes, it would be hard to find
their superior in Babylonian and Assyrian literature. They are, in fact,
very remarkable compositions, and in themselves justify the claim that
the Sumerians were possessed of a literature in the proper sense of the
term.

But that is not their only value, for they give a vivid picture of
ancient Sumerian life and of the ideals and aims which actuated the
people and their rulers. The Sumerians were essentially an unmilitary
race. That they could maintain a stubborn fight for their territory is
proved by the prolonged struggle maintained by Shirpurla against her
rival Gishkhu, but neither ruler nor people was inflamed by love of
conquest for its own sake. They were settled in a rich and fertile
country, which supplied their own wants in abundance, and they were
content to lead a peaceful life therein, engaged in agricultural and
industrial pursuits, and devoted wholly to the worship of their gods.
Gudea’s inscriptions enable us to realize with what fervour they carried
out the rebuilding of a temple, and how the whole resources of the
nation were devoted to the successful completion of the work. It is true
that the rebuilding of E-ninnû was undertaken in a critical period when
the land was threatened with famine, and the peculiar magnificence with
which the work was carried out may be partly explained as due to the
belief that such devotion would ensure a return of material prosperity.
But the existence of such a belief is in itself an index to the people’s
character, and we may take it that the record faithfully represents the
relations of the Sumerians to their gods, and the important place which
worship and ritual occupied in the national life.

Moreover, the inscriptions of Gudea furnish much valuable information
with regard to the details of Sumerian worship and the elaborate
organization of the temples. From them we can reconstruct a picture of
one of these immense buildings, with its numerous shrines and courts,
surrounded by sacred gardens and raising its ziggurat, or temple tower,
high above the surrounding city. Within its dark chambers were the
mysterious figures of the gods, and what little light could enter would
have been reflected in the tanks of sacred water sunk to the level of
the pavement. The air within the shrines must have been heavy with the
smell of incense and of aromatic woods, while the deep silence would
have been broken only by the chanting of the priests and the feet of
those that bore offerings. Outside in the sunlight cedars and other rare
trees cast a pleasant shade, and birds flew about among the flowers and
bushes in the outer courts and on the garden terraces. The area covered
by the temple buildings must have been enormous, for they included the
dwellings of the priests, stables and pens for the cattle, sheep, and
kids employed for sacrifice, and treasure-chambers and storehouses and
granaries for the produce from the temple lands.

We also get much information with regard to the nature of the offerings
and the character of the ceremonies which were performed. We may mention
as of peculiar interest Gudea’s symbolical rite which preceded the
making of the sun-dried bricks, and the ceremony of the installation of
Ningirsu in the presence of the prostrate city. The texts also throw
an interesting light on the truly Oriental manner in which, when
approaching one deity for help, the cooperation and assistance of other
deities were first secured. Thus Gudea solicited the intercession of
Ningirsu and Gatumdug before applying to the goddess Ninâ to interpret
his dream. The extremely human character of the gods themselves is also
well illustrated. Thus we gather from the texts that Ningirsu’s temple
was arranged like the palace of a Sumerian ruler and that he was
surrounded by gods who took the place of the attendants and ministers
of his human counterpart. His son was installed in a place of honour and
shared with him the responsibility of government. Another god was his
personal attendant and cupbearer, who offered him fair water and looked
after the ablutions. Two more were his generals, who secured his country
against the attacks of foes. Another was his counsellor, who received
and presented petitions from his subjects and superintended his
journeys. Another was the head of his harîm, a position of great
trust and responsibility, while a keeper of the harîm looked after the
practical details. Another god was the driver of his chariot, and it
is interesting to note that the chariot was drawn by an ass, for horses
were not introduced into Western Asia until a much later period. Other
gods performed the functions of head shepherd, chief musician, chief
singer, head cultivator and inspector of irrigation, inspector of the
fishing, land steward, and architect. His household also included his
wife and his seven virgin daughters. In addition to the account of the
various functions performed by these lesser deities, the texts also
furnish valuable facts with regard to the characters and attributes
of the greater gods and goddesses, such as the attributes of Ningirsu
himself, and the character of Ninâ as the goddess who divined and
interpreted the secrets of the gods.

But perhaps the most interesting conclusions to be drawn from the texts
relate to the influence exerted by the ancient Sumerians upon Semitic
beliefs and practices. It has, of course, long been recognized that the
later Semitic inhabitants of Babylonia and Assyria drew most of their
culture from the Sumerians, whom they displaced and absorbed. Their
system of writing, the general structure of their temples, the ritual of
their worship, the majority of their religious compositions, and many of
their gods themselves are to be traced to a Sumerian origin, and much of
the information obtained from the cylinders of Gudea merely confirms
or illustrates the conclusions already deduced from other sources. As
instances we may mention the belief in spirits, which is illustrated by
the importance attached to the placating of the Anunnaki, or Spirits of
the Earth, to whom a special place and special offerings were assigned
in E-ninnû. The Sumerian origin of ceremonies of purification is
confirmed by Gudea’s purification of the city before beginning the
building of the temple, and again before the transference of the god
from his old temple to the new one. The consultation of omens, which was
so marked a feature of Babylonian and Assyrian life, is seen in actual
operation under the Sumerians; for, even after Gudea had received direct
instructions from Ningirsu to begin building his temple, he did not
proceed to carry them out until he had consulted the omens and found
that they were favourable. Moreover, the references to mythological
beings, such as the seven heroes, the dragon of the deep, and the god
who slew the dragon, confirm the opinion that the creation legends and
other mythological compositions of the Babylonians were derived by them
from Sumerian sources. But there are two incidents in the narrative
which are on a rather different plane and are more startling in their
novelty. One is the story of Gudea’s dream, and the other the sign
which he sought from his god. The former is distinctly apocalyptic in
character, and both may be parallelled in what is regarded as purely
Semitic literature. That such conceptions existed among the Sumerians is
a most interesting fact, and although the theory of independent origin
is possible, their existence may well have influenced later Semitic
beliefs.




CHAPTER V--ELAM AND BABYLON, THE COUNTRY OF THE SEA AND THE KASSITES


Up to five years ago our knowledge of Elam and of the part she played in
the ancient world was derived, in the main, from a few allusions to the
country to be found in the records of Babylonian and Assyrian kings. It
is true that a few inscriptions of the native rulers had been found in
Persia, but they belonged to the late periods of her history, and the
majority consisted of short dedicatory formulae and did not supply us
with much historical information. But the excavations carried on since
then by M. de Morgan at Susa have revealed an entirely new chapter of
ancient Oriental history, and have thrown a flood of light upon the
position occupied by Elam among the early races of the East.

Lying to the north of the Persian Gulf and to the east of the Tigris,
and rising from the broad plains nearer the coast to the mountainous
districts within its borders on the east and north, Elam was one of the
nearest neighbours of Chaldæa. A few facts concerning her relations with
Babylonia during certain periods of her history have long been known,
and her struggles with the later kings of Assyria are known in some
detail; but for her history during the earliest periods we have had to
trust mainly to conjecture. That in the earlier as in the later periods
she should have been in constant antagonism with Babylonia might
legitimately be suspected, and it is not surprising that we should find
an echo of her early struggles with Chaldæa in the legends which were
current in the later periods of Babylonian history. In the fourth and
fifth tablets, or sections, of the great Babylonian epic which describes
the exploits of the Babylonian hero Gilgamesh, a story is told of an
expedition undertaken by Gilgamesh and his friend Ba-bani against an
Elamite despot named Khum-baba. It is related in the poem that Khumbaba
was feared by all who dwelt near him, for his roaring was like the
storm, and any man perished who was rash enough to enter the cedar-wood
in which he dwelt. But Gilgamesh, encouraged by a dream sent him by
Sha-mash, the Sun-god, pressed on with his friend, and, having entered
the wood, succeeded in slaying Khumbaba and in cutting off his head.
This legend is doubtless based on episodes in early Babylonian and
Elamite history. Khumbaba may not have been an actual historical ruler,
but at least he represents or personifies the power of Elam, and the
success of Gilgamesh no doubt reflects the aspirations with which many a
Babylonian expedition set out for the Elamite frontier.

Incidentally it may be noted that the legend possibly had a still closer
historical parallel, for the name of Khumbaba occurs as a component in
a proper name upon one of the Elamite contracts found recently by M. de
Morgan at Mai-Amir. The name in question is written _Khumbaba-arad-ili_,
“Khumbaba, the servant of God,” and it proves that at the date at which
the contract was written (about 1300-1000 B.C.) the name of Khumbaba was
still held in remembrance, possibly as that of an early historical ruler
of the country.

In her struggles with Chaldæa, Elam was not successful during the
earliest historical period of which we have obtained information; and,
so far as we can tell at present, her princes long continued to own
allegiance to the Semitic rulers whose influence was predominant from
time to time in the plains of Lower Mesopotamia. Tradition relates that
two of the earliest Semitic rulers whose names are known to us, Sargon
and Narâm-Sin, kings of Agade, held sway in Elam, for in the “Omens”
 which were current in a later period concerning them, the former is
credited with the conquest of the whole country, while of the latter it
is related that he conquered Apirak, an Elamite district, and captured
its king. Some doubts were formerly cast upon these traditions inasmuch
as they were found in a text containing omens or forecasts, but these
doubts were removed by the discovery of contemporary documents by which
the later traditions were confirmed. Sargon’s conquest of Elam, for
instance, was proved to be historical by a reference to the event in a
date-formula upon tablets belonging to his reign. Moreover, the event
has received further confirmation from an unpublished tablet in the
British Museum, containing a copy of the original chronicle from which
the historical extracts in the “Omens” were derived. The portion of
the composition inscribed upon this tablet does not contain the lines
referring to Sargon’s conquest of Elam, for these occurred in an earlier
section of the composition; but the recovery of the tablet puts beyond
a doubt the historical character of the traditions preserved upon the
omen-tablet as a whole, and the conquest of Elam is thus confirmed
by inference. The new text does recount the expedition undertaken by
Narâm-Sin, the son of Sargon, against Apirak, and so furnishes a direct
confirmation of this event.

Another early conqueror of Elam, who was probably of Semitic origin,
was Alu-usharshid, king of the city of Kish, for, from a number of his
inscriptions found near those of Sargon at Nippur in Babylonia, we learn
that he subdued Elam and Para’se, the district in which the city of Susa
was probably situated. From a small mace-head preserved in the British
Museum we know of another conquest of Elam by a Semitic ruler of this
early period. The mace-head was made and engraved by the orders of
Mutabil, an early governor of the city of Dûr-ilu, to commemorate his
own valour as the man “who smote the head of the hosts” of Elam. Mutabil
was not himself an independent ruler, and his conquest of Elam must have
been undertaken on behalf of the suzerain to whom he owed allegiance,
and thus his victory cannot be classed in the same category as those of
his predecessors. A similar remark applies to the success against
the city of Anshan in Elam, achieved by Grudea, the Sumerian ruler
of Shirpurla, inasmuch as he was a patesi, or viceroy, and not an
independent king. Of greater duration was the influence exercised over
Elam by the kings of Ur, for bricks and contract-tablets have been found
at Susa proving that Dungi, one of the most powerful kings of Ur, and
Bur-Sin, Ine-Sin, and Oamil-Sin, kings of the second dynasty in that
city, all in turn included Elam within the limits of their empire.

Such are the main facts which until recently had been ascertained
with regard to the influence of early Babylonian rulers in Elam. The
information is obtained mainly from Babylonian sources, and until
recently we have been unable to fill in any details of the picture
from the Elamite side. But this inability has now been removed by M.
de Morgan’s discoveries. From the inscribed bricks, cones, stelæ, and
statues that have been brought to light in the course of his excavations
at Susa, we have recovered the name of a succession of native Elamite
rulers. All those who are to be assigned to this early period, during
which Elam owed allegiance to the kings of Babylonia, ascribe to
themselves the title of _patesi_, or viceroy, of Susa, in acknowledgment
of their dependence. Their records consist principally of building
inscriptions and foundation memorials, and they commemorate the
construction or repair of temples, the cutting of canals, and the like.
They do not, therefore, throw much light upon the problems connected
with the external history of Elam during this early period, but we
obtain from them a glimpse of the internal administration of the
country. We see a nation without ambition to extend its boundaries, and
content, at any rate for the time, to owe allegiance to foreign rulers,
while the energies of its native princes are devoted exclusively to the
cultivation of the worship of the gods and to the amelioration of the
conditions of the life of the people in their charge.

A difficult but interesting problem presents itself for solution at the
outset of our inquiry into the history of this people as revealed by
their lately recovered inscriptions,--the problem of their race and
origin. Found at Susa in Elam, and inscribed by princes bearing purely
Elamite names, we should expect these votive and memorial texts to be
written entirely in the Elamite language. But such is not the case,
for many of them are written in good Semitic Babylonian. While some
are entirely composed in the tongue which we term Elamite or Anzanite,
others, so far as their language and style is concerned, might have been
written by any early Semitic king ruling in Babylonia. Why did early
princes of Susa make this use of the Babylonian tongue?

At first sight it might seem possible to trace a parallel in the use of
the Babylonian language by kings and officials in Egypt and Syria
during the fifteenth century B.C., as revealed in the letters from
Tell el-Amarna. But a moment’s thought will show that the cases are not
similar. The Egyptian or Syrian scribe employed Babylonian as a medium
for his official foreign correspondence because Babylonian at that
period was the _lingua franca_ of the East. But the object of the
early Elamite rulers was totally different. Their inscribed bricks and
memorial stelæ were not intended for the eyes of foreigners, but for
those of their own descendants. Built into the structure of a temple,
or buried beneath the edifice, one of their principal objects was to
preserve the name and deeds of the writer from oblivion. Like similar
documents found on the sites of Assyrian and Babylonian cities, they
sometimes include curses upon any impious man, who, on finding the
inscription after the temple shall have fallen into ruins, should in
any way injure the inscription or deface the writer’s name. It will be
obvious that the writers of these inscriptions intended that they should
be intelligible to those who might come across them in the future. If,
therefore, they employed the Babylonian as well as the Elamite language,
it is clear that they expected that their future readers might be either
Babylonian or Elamite; and this belief can only be explained on the
supposition that their own subjects were of mixed race.

It is therefore certain that at this early period of Elamite history
Semitic Babylonians and Elamites dwelt side by side in Susa and retained
their separate languages. The problem therefore resolves itself into the
inquiry: which of these two peoples occupied the country first? Were the
Semites at first in sole possession, which was afterwards disputed by
the incursion of Elamite tribes from the north and east? Or were the
Elamites the original inhabitants of the land, into which the Semites
subsequently pressed from Babylonia?

A similar mixture of races is met with in Babylonia itself in the
early period of the history of that country. There the early Sumerian
inhabitants were gradually dispossessed by the invading Semite, who
adopted the civilization of the conquered race, and took over the system
of cuneiform writing, which he modified to suit his own language. In
Babylonia the Semites eventually predominated and the Sumerians as a
race disappeared, but during the process of absorption the two languages
were employed indiscriminately. The kings of the First Babylonian
Dynasty wrote their votive inscriptions sometimes in Sumerian, sometimes
in Semitic Babylonian; at other times they employed both languages
for the same text, writing the record first in Sumerian and afterwards
appending a Semitic translation by the side; and in the legal and
commercial documents of the period the old Sumerian legal forms and
phrases were retained intact. In Elam we may suppose that the use of the
Sumerian and Semitic languages was the same.

It may be surmised, however, that the first Semitic incursions into Elam
took place at a much later period than those into Babylonia, and under
very different conditions. When overrunning the plains and cities of the
Sumerians, the Semites were comparatively uncivilized, and, so far as we
know, without a system of writing of their own. The incursions into
Elam must have taken place under the great Semitic conquerors, such as
Sar-gon and Narâm-Sin and Alu-usharshid. At this period they had fully
adopted and modified the Sumerian characters to express their own
Semitic tongue, and on their invasion of Elam they brought their system
of writing with them. The native princes of Elam, whom they conquered,
adopted it in turn for many of their votive texts and inscribed
monuments when they wished to write them in the Babylonian language.

Such is the most probable explanation of the occurrence in Elam of
inscriptions in the Old Babylonian language, written by native princes
concerning purely domestic matters. But a further question now suggests
itself. Assuming that this was the order in which events took place,
are we to suppose that the first Semitic invaders of Elam found there a
native population in a totally undeveloped stage of civilization? Or did
they find a population enjoying a comparatively high state of culture,
different from their own, which they proceeded to modify and transform!
Luckily, we have not to fall back on conjecture for an answer to these
questions, for a recent discovery at Susa has furnished material from
which it is possible to reconstruct in outline the state of culture of
these early Elamites.

This interesting discovery consists of a number of clay tablets
inscribed in the proto-Elamite system of writing, a system which was
probably the only one in use in the country during the period before the
Semitic invasion. The documents in question are small, roughly formed
tablets of clay very similar to those employed in the early periods of
Babylonian history, but the signs and characters impressed upon them
offer the greatest contrast to the Sumerian and early Babylonian
characters with which we are familiar. Although they cannot be fully
deciphered at present, it is probable that they are tablets of accounts,
the signs upon them consisting of lists of figures and what are
probably ideographs for things. Some of the ideographs, such as that for
“tablet,” with which many of the texts begin, are very similar to the
Sumerian or Babylonian signs for the same objects; but the majority are
entirely different and have been formed and developed upon a system of
their own.

[Illustration: 230.jpg CLAY TABLET, FOUND AT SUSA, BEARING AN
INSCRIPTION IN THE EARLY PROTO-ELAMITE CHARACTER.]

     The photograph is taken from M. de Morgan’s _Délégation en
     Perse, Mem._, t. vi, pi. 23.

On these tablets, in fact, we have a new class of cuneiform writing in
an early stage of its development, when the hieroglyphic or pictorial
character of the ideographs was still prominent.

[Illustration: 231.jpg CLAY TABLET, RECENTLY FOUND AT SUSA, BEARING AN
INSCRIPTION IN THE EARLY PROTO-ELAMITE CHARACTER.]

     The photograph is reproduced from M. de Morgan’s _Délégation
     en Perse, Mém._, t. vi, pi. 22.

Although the meaning of the majority of these ideographs has not yet
been identified, Père Scheil, who has edited the texts, has succeeded
in making out the system of numeration. He has identified the signs for
unity, 10, 100, and 1,000, and for certain fractions, and the signs for
these figures are quite different from those employed by the Sumerians.

[Illustration: 231a.jpg Fractions]

The system, too, is different, for it is a decimal, and not a
sexagesimal, system of numeration.

That in its origin this form of writing had some connection with that
employed and, so far as we know, invented by the ancient Sumerians
is possible.* But it shows small trace of Sumerian influence, and the
disparity in the two systems of numeration is a clear indication that,
at any rate, it broke off and was isolated from the latter at a very
early period. Having once been adopted by the early Elamites, it
continued to be used by them for long periods with but small change or
modification. Employed far from the centre of Sumerian civilization, its
development was slow, and it seems to have remained in its ideographic
state, while the system employed by the Sumerians, and adopted by the
Semitic Babylonians, was developed along syllabic lines.

     * It is, of course, also possible that the system of writing
     had no connection in its origin with that of the Sumerians,
     and was invented independently of the system employed in
     Babylonia. In that case, the signs which resemble certain of
     the Sumerian characters must have been adopted in a later
     stage of its development. Though it would be rash to
     dogmatize on the subject, the view that connects its origin
     with the Sumerians appears on the whole to fit in best with
     the evidence at present available.

It was without doubt this proto-Elamite system of writing which the
Semites from Babylonia found employed in Elam on their first incursions
into that country. They brought with them their own more convenient form
of writing, and, when the country had once been finally subdued, the
subject Elamite princes adopted the foreign system of writing and
language from their conquerors for memorial and monumental inscriptions.
But the ancient native writing was not entirely ousted, and continued
to be employed by the common people of Elam for the ordinary purposes
of daily life. That this was the case at least until the reign of
Karibu-sha-Shu-shinak, one of the early subject native rulers, is clear
from one of his inscriptions engraved upon a block of limestone to
commemorate the dedication of what were probably some temple furnishings
in honour of the god Shu-shinak.

[Illustration: 233.jpg BLOCK OF LIMESTONE, FOUND AT SUSA, BEARING
INSCRIPTIONS OF KARIBU-SHA-SHUSHINAK.]

     The photograph is taken from M. de Morgan’s _Délégation en
     Perse_, Mém., t. vi, pi. 2.

The main part of the inscription is written in Semitic Babylonian,
and below there is an addition to the text written in proto-Elamite
characters, probably enumerating the offerings which the
Karibu-sha-Shushinak decreed should be made for the future in honour
of the god.* In course of time this proto-Elamite system of writing by
means of ideographs seems to have died out, and a modified form of the
Babylonian system was adopted by the Elamites for writing their own
language phonetically. It is in this phonetic character that the
so-called “Anzanite” texts of the later Elamite princes were composed.

     *We have assumed that both inscriptions were the work of
     Karibu-sha-Shushinak. But it is also possible that the
     second one in proto-Elamite characters was added at a later
     period. From its position on the stone it is clear that it
     was written after and not before Karibu-sha-Shushinak’s
     inscription in Semitic Babylonian. See the photographic
     reproduction.

Karibu-sha-Shushinak, whose recently discovered bilingual inscription
has been referred to above, was one of the earlier of the subject
princes of Elam, and he probably reigned at Susa not later than B.C.
3000. He styles himself “patesi of Susa, governor of the land of Elam,”
 but we do not know at present to what contemporary king in Babylonia
he owed allegiance. The longest of his inscriptions that have been
recovered is engraved upon a stele of limestone and records the building
of the Gate of Shushinak at Susa and the cutting of a canal; it also
recounts the offerings which Karibu-sha-Shushinak dedicated on the
completion of the work. It may here be quoted as an example of the
class of votive inscriptions from which the names of these early Elamite
rulers have been recovered. The inscription runs as follows: “For
the god Shushinak, his lord, Karibu-sha-Shushinak, the son of
Shimbi-ish-khuk, patesi of Susa, governor of the land of Elam,--when
he set the (door) of his Gate in place,... in the Gate of the god
Shushinak, his lord, and when he had opened the canal of Sidur, he set
up in face thereof his canopy, and he set planks of cedar-wood for its
gate. A sheep in the interior thereof, and sheep without, he appointed
(for sacrifice) to him each day. On days of festival he caused the
people to sing songs in the Gate of the god Shushinak. And twenty
measures of fine oil he dedicated to make his gate beautiful. Four
_magi_ of silver he dedicated; a censer of silver and gold he dedicated
for a sweet odour; a,sword he dedicated; an axe with four blades
he dedicated, and he dedicated silver in addition for the mounting
thereof.... A righteous judgment he judged in the city! As for the man
who shall transgress his judgment or shall remove his gift, may the
gods Shushinak and Shamash, Bel and Ea, Ninni and Sin, Mnkharsag and
Nati--may all the gods uproot his foundation, and his seed may they
destroy!”

It will be seen that Karibu-sha-Shushinak takes a delight in enumerating
the details of the offerings he has ordained in honour of his city-god
Shushinak, and this religious temper is peculiarly characteristic of the
princes of Elam throughout the whole course of their history. Another
interesting point to notice in the inscription is that, although the
writer invokes Shushinak, his own god, and puts his name at the head
of the list of deities whose vengeance he implores upon the impious, he
also calls upon the gods of the Babylonians. As he wrote the inscription
itself in Babylonian, in the belief that it might be recovered by
some future Semitic inhabitant of his country, so he included in his
imprecations those deities whose names he conceived would be most
reverenced by such a reader. In addition to Karibu-sha-Shushinak the
names of a number of other patesis, or viceroys, have recently
been recovered, such as Khutran-tepti, and Idadu I and his son
Kal-Rukhu-ratir, and his grandson Idadu II. All these probably ruled
after Karibu-sha-Shushinak, and may be set in the early period of
Babylonian supremacy in Elam.

It has been stated above that the allegiance which these early Elamite
princes owed to their overlords in Babylonia was probably reflected in
the titles which they bear upon their inscriptions recently found at
Susa. These titles are “_patesi_ of Susa, _shakkannak_ of Elam,” which
may be rendered as “viceroy of Susa, governor of Elam.” But inscriptions
have been found on the same site belonging to another series of rulers,
to whom a different title is applied. Instead of referring to themselves
as viceroys of Susa and governors of Elam, they bear the title of
_sukkal_ of Elam, of Siparki, and of Susa. Siparki, or Sipar, was
probably the name of an important section of Elamite territory, and
the title _sukkalu_, “ruler,” probably carries with it an idea of
independence of foreign control which is absent from the title of
_patesi_. It is therefore legitimate to trace this change of title to
a corresponding change in the political condition of Elam; and there is
much to be said for the view that the rulers of Elam who bore the title
of _sukkalu_ reigned at a period when Elam herself was independent, and
may possibly have exercised a suzerainty over the neighbouring districts
of Babylonia.

The worker of this change in the political condition of Elam and
the author of her independence was a king named Kutir-Nakhkhunte or
Kutir-Na’khunde, whose name and deeds have been preserved in
later Assyrian records, where he is termed Kudur-Nankhundi and
Kudur-Nakhundu.* This ruler, according to the Assyrian king
Ashur-bani-pal, was not content with throwing off the yoke under which
his land had laboured for so long, but carried war into the country of
his suzerain and marched through Babylonia devastating and despoiling
the principal cities. This successful Elamite campaign took place,
according to the computation of the later Assyrian scribes, about the
year 2280 B. c, and it is probable that for many years afterwards the
authority of the King of Elam extended over the plains of Babylonia.
It has been suggested that Kutir-Nakh-khunte, after including Babylonia
within his empire, did not remain permanently in Elam, but may have
resided for a part of each year, at least, in Lower Mesopotamia.
His object, no doubt, would have been to superintend in person the
administration of his empire and to check any growing spirit of
independence among his local governors. He may thus have appointed in
Susa itself a local governor who would carry on the business of the
country during his absence, and, under the king himself, would wield
supreme authority. Such governors may have been the sukkali, who, unlike
the patesi, were independent of foreign control, but yet did not enjoy
the full title of “king.”

     * For references to the passages where the name occurs, see
     King, _Letters of Hammurabi_, vol. i, p. Ivy.

It is possible that the sukkalu who ruled in Elam during the reign of
Kutir-Nakhkhunte was named Temti-agun, for a short inscription of
this ruler has been recovered, in which he records that he built and
dedicated a certain temple with the object of ensuring the preservation
of the life of Kutir-Na’khundi. If we may identify the Kutir-Va’khundi
of this text with the great Elamite conqueror, Kutir-Nakhkhunte, it
follows that Temti-agun, the sukkal of Susa, was his subordinate. The
inscription mentions other names which are possibly those of rulers of
this period, and reads as follows: “Temti-agun, sukkal of Susa, the son
of the sister of Sirukdu’, hath built a temple of bricks at Ishme-karab
for the preservation of the life of Kutir-Na’khundi, and for the
preservation of the life of Lila-irtash, and for the preservation of his
own life, and for the preservation of the life of Temti-khisha-khanesh
and of Pil-kishamma-khashduk.” As Lila-irtash is mentioned immediately
after Kutir-Na’khundi, he was possibly his son, and he may have
succeeded him as ruler of the empire of Elam and Babylonia, though no
confirmation of this view has yet been discovered. Temti-khisha-khanesh
is mentioned immediately after the reference to the preservation of the
life of Temti-agun himself, and it may be conjectured that the name was
that of Temti-agun’s son, or possibly that of his wife, in which event
the last two personages mentioned in the text may have been the sons of
Temti-agun.

This short text affords a good example of one class of votive
inscriptions from which it is possible to recover the names of Elamite
rulers of this period, and it illustrates the uncertainty which at
present attaches to the identification of the names themselves and the
order in which they are to be arranged. Such uncertainty necessarily
exists when only a few texts have been recovered, and it will disappear
with the discovery of additional monuments by which the results already
arrived at may be checked. We need not here enumerate all the names of
the later Elamite rulers which have been found in the numerous votive
inscriptions recovered during the recent excavations at Susa. The order
in which they should be arranged is still a matter of considerable
uncertainty, and the facts recorded by them in such inscriptions as we
possess mainly concern the building and restoration of Elamite temples
and the decoration of shrines, and they are thus of no great historical
interest. These votive texts are well illustrated by a remarkable find
of foundation deposits made last year by M. de Morgan in the temple of
Shushinak at Susa, consisting of figures and jewelry of gold and silver,
and objects of lead, bronze, iron, stone, and ivory, cylinder-seals,
mace-heads, vases, etc. This is the richest foundation deposit that has
been recovered on any ancient site, and its archaeological interest in
connection with the development of Elamite art is great. But in no other
way does the find affect our conception of the history of the country,
and we may therefore pass on to a consideration of such recent
discoveries as throw new light upon the course of history in Western
Asia.

With the advent of the First Dynasty in Babylon Elam found herself
face to face with a power prepared to dispute her claims to exercise a
suzerainty over the plains of Mesopotamia. It is held by many writers
that the First Dynasty of Babylon was of Arab origin, and there is much
to be said for this view. M. Pognon was the first to start the theory
that its kings were not purely Babylonian, but were of either Arab or
Aramaean extraction, and he based his theory on a study of the forms of
the names which some of them bore. The name of Samsu-imna, for instance,
means “the sun is our god,” but the form of the words of which the name
is composed betray foreign influence. Thus in Babylonian the name for
“sun” or the Sun-god would be _Shamash_ or _Shamshu_, not _Samsu_; in
the second half of the name, while _ilu_ (“god”) is good Babylonian, the
ending _na_, which is the pronominal suffix of the first person plural,
is not Babylonian, but Arabic. We need not here enter into a long
philological discussion, and the instance already cited may suffice to
show in what way many of the names met in the Babylonian inscriptions
of this period betray a foreign, and possibly an Arabic, origin. But
whether we assign the forms of these names to Arabic influence or not,
it may be regarded as certain that, the First Dynasty of Babylon had
its origin in the incursion into Babylonia of a new wave of Semitic
immigration.

[Illustration: 240.jpg BRICK STAMPED WITH AN INSCRIPTION OF
KUDUR-MABURG]

The invading Semites brought with them fresh blood and unexhausted
energy, and, finding many of their own race in scattered cities and
settlements throughout the country, they succeeded in establishing a
purely Semitic dynasty, with its capital at Babylon, and set about the
task of freeing the country from any vestiges of foreign control. Many
centuries earlier Semitic kings had ruled in Babylonian cities, and
Semitic empires had been formed there. Sargon and Narâm-Sin,
having their capital at Agade, had established their control over a
considerable area of Western Asia and had held Elam as a province. But
so far as Elam was concerned Kutir-Nakhkhunte had reversed the balance
and had raised Elam to the position of the predominant power.

Of the struggles and campaigns of the earlier kings of the First Dynasty
of Babylon we know little, for, although we possess a considerable
number of legal and commercial documents of the period, we have
recovered no strictly historical inscriptions. Our main source of
information is the dates upon these documents, which are not dated by
the years of the reigning king, but on a system adopted by the early
Babylonian kings from their Sumerian predecessors. In the later periods
of Babylonian history tablets were dated in the year of the king who was
reigning at the time the document was drawn up, but this simple system
had not been adopted at this early period. In place of this we find that
each year was cited by the event of greatest importance which occurred
in that year. This event might be the cutting of a canal, when the year
in which this took place might be referred to as “the year in which
the canal named Ai-khegallu was cut;” or it might be the building of a
temple, as in the date-formula, “the year in which the great temple of
the Moon-god was built;” or it might be “the conquest of a city, such
as the year in which the city of Kish was destroyed.” Now it will be
obvious that this system of dating had many disadvantages. An event
might be of great importance for one city, while it might never have
been heard of in another district; thus it sometimes happened that the
same event was not adopted throughout the whole country for designating
a particular year, and the result was that different systems of
dating were employed in different parts of Babylonia. Moreover, when a
particular system had been in use for a considerable time, it required
a very good memory to retain the order and period of the various events
referred to in the date-formulae, so as to fix in a moment the date of a
document by its mention of one of them. In order to assist themselves
in their task of fixing dates in this manner, the scribes of the First
Dynasty of Babylon drew up lists of the titles of the years, arranged
in chronological order under the reigns of the kings to which they
referred. Some of these lists have been recovered, and they are of the
greatest assistance in fixing the chronology, while at the same time
they furnish us with considerable information concerning the history of
the period of which we should otherwise have been in ignorance.

From these lists of date-formulæ, and from the dates themselves which
are found upon the legal and commercial tablets of the period, we learn
that Kish, Ka-sallu, and Isin all gave trouble to the earlier kings of
the First Dynasty, and had in turn to be subdued. Elam did not watch the
diminution of her influence in Babylonia without a struggle to retain
it. Under Kudur-mabug, who was prince or governor of the districts lying
along the frontier of Elam, the Elamites struggled hard to maintain
their position in Babylonia, making the city of Ur the centre from which
they sought to check the growing power of Babylon. From bricks that have
been recovered from Mukayyer, the site of the city of Ur, we learn that
Kudur-mabug rebuilt the temple in that city dedicated to the Moon-god,
which is an indication of the firm hold he had obtained upon the city.
It was obvious to the new Semitic dynasty in Babylon that, until Ur and
the neighbouring city of Larsam had been captured, they could entertain
no hope of removing the Elamite yoke from Southern Babylonia. It is
probable that the earlier kings of the dynasty made many attempts to
capture them, with varying success. An echo of one of their struggles in
which they claimed the victory may be seen in the date-formula for the
fourteenth year of the reign of Sin-muballit, Hammurabi’s father and
predecessor on the throne of Babylon. This year was referred to in the
documents of the period as “the year in which the people of Ur were
slain with the sword.” It will be noted that the capture of the city
is not commemorated, so that we may infer that the slaughter of the
Elamites which is recorded did not materially reduce their influence,
as they were left in possession of their principal stronghold. In fact,
Elam was not signally defeated in the reign of Kudur-mabug, but in that
of his son Rim-Sin. From the date-formulæ of Hammurabi’s reign we learn
that the struggle between Elam and Babylon was brought to a climax in
the thirtieth year of his reign, when it is recorded in the formulas
that he defeated the Elamite army and overthrew Rim-Sin, while in the
following year we gather that he added the land of E’mutbal, that is,
the western district of Elam, to his dominions.

An unpublished chronicle in the British Museum gives us further details
of Hammurabi’s victory over the Elamites, and at the same time makes it
clear that the defeat and overthrow of Rim-Sin was not so crushing
as has hitherto been supposed. This chronicle relates that Hammurabi
attacked Rim-Sin, and, after capturing the cities of Ur and Larsam,
carried their spoil to Babylon. Up to the present it has been supposed
that Hammurabi’s victory marked the end of Elamite influence in
Babylonia, and that thenceforward the supremacy of Babylon was
established throughout the whole of the country. But from the
new chronicle we gather that Hammurabi did not succeed in finally
suppressing the attempts of Elam to regain her former position. It is
true that the cities of Ur and Larsam were finally incorporated in the
Babylonian empire, and the letters of Hammurabi to Sin-idinnam, the
governor whom he placed in authority over Larsam, afford abundant
evidence of the stringency of the administrative control which he
established over Southern Babylonia. But Rîm-Sin was only crippled for
the time, and, on being driven from Ur and Larsam, he retired beyond
the Elamite frontier and devoted his energies to the recuperation of his
forces against the time when he should feel himself strong enough again
to make a bid for victory in his struggle against the growing power of
Babylon. It is probable that he made no further attempt to renew the
contest during the life of Hammurabi, but after Samsu-iluna, the son
of Hammurabi, had succeeded to the Babylonian throne, he appeared in
Babylonia at the head of the forces he had collected, and attempted to
regain the cities and territory he had lost.

[Illustration: 245.jpg SEMITIC BABYLONIAN CONTRACT-TABLET]

     Inscribed in the reign of Hammurabi with a deed recording
     the division of property. The actual tablet is on the right;
     that which appears to be another and larger tablet on the
     left is the hollow clay case in which the tablet on the
     right was originally enclosed. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell
     & Co.

The portion of the text of the chronicle relating to the war between
Rîm-Sin and Samsu-iluna is broken so that it is not possible to follow
the campaign in detail, but it appears that Samsu-iluna defeated
Rim-Sin, and possibly captured him or burnt him alive in a palace in
which he had taken refuge.

With the final defeat of Rîm-Sin by Samsu-iluna it is probable that Elam
ceased to be a thorn in the side of the kings of Babylon and that
she made no further attempts to extend her authority beyond her own
frontiers. But no sooner had Samsu-iluna freed his country from all
danger from this quarter than he found himself faced by a new foe,
before whom the dynasty eventually succumbed. This fact we learn from
the unpublished chronicle to which reference has already been made, and
the name of this new foe, as supplied by the chronicle, will render
it necessary to revise all current schemes of Babylonian chronology.
Samsu-iluna’s new foe was no other than Iluma-ilu, the first king of the
Second Dynasty, and, so far from having been regarded as Samsu-iluna’s
contemporary, hitherto it has been imagined that he ascended the throne
of Babylon one hundred and eighteen years after Samsu-iluna’s death.
The new information supplied by the chronicle thus proves two important
facts: first, that the Second Dynasty, instead of immediately succeeding
the First Dynasty, was partly contemporary with it; second, that during
the period in which the two dynasties were contemporary they were at
war with one another, the Second Dynasty gradually encroaching on
the territory of the First Dynasty, until it eventually succeeded in
capturing Babylon and in getting the whole of the country under its
control. We also learn from the new chronicle that this Second Dynasty
at first established itself in “the Country of the Sea,” that is to say,
the districts in the extreme south of Babylonia bordering on the Persian
Gulf, and afterwards extended its borders northward until it gradually
absorbed the whole of Babylonia. Before discussing the other facts
supplied by the new chronicle, with regard to the rise and growth of the
Country of the Sea, whose kings formed the so-called “Second Dynasty,”
 it will be well to refer briefly to the sources from which the
information on the period to be found in the current histories is
derived.

All the schemes of Babylonian chronology that have been suggested during
the last twenty years have been based mainly on the great list of kings
which is preserved in the British Museum. This document was drawn up in
the Neo-Babylonian or Persian period, and when complete it gave a list
of the names of all the Babylonian kings from the First Dynasty of
Babylon down to the time in which it was written. The names of the kings
are arranged in dynasties, and details are given as to the length of
their reigns and the total number of years each dynasty lasted. The
beginning of the list which gave the names of the First Dynasty is
wanting, but the missing portion has been restored from a smaller
document which gives a list of the kings of the First and Second
Dynasties only. In the great list of kings the dynasties are arranged
one after the other, and it was obvious that its compiler imagined that
they succeeded one another in the order in which he arranged them.
But when the total number of years the dynasties lasted is learned, we
obtain dates for the first dynasties in the list which are too early to
agree with other chronological information supplied by the historical
inscriptions. The majority of writers have accepted the figures of the
list of kings and have been content to ignore the discrepancies; others
have sought to reconcile the available data by ingenious emendations of
the figures given by the list and the historical inscriptions, or have
omitted the Second Dynasty entirely from their calculations. The new
chronicle, by showing that the First and Second Dynasties were partly
contemporaneous, explains the discrepancies that have hitherto proved so
puzzling.

It would be out of place here to enter into a detailed discussion of
Babylonian chronology, and therefore we will confine ourselves to a
brief description of the sequence of events as revealed by the new
chronicle. According to the list of kings, Iluma-ilu’s reign was a long
one, lasting for sixty years, and the new chronicle gives no indication
as to the period of his reign at which active hostilities with Babylon
broke out. If the war occurred in the latter portion of his reign, it
would follow that he had been for many years organizing the forces of
the new state he had founded in the south of Babylonia before making
serious encroachments in the north; and in that case the incessant
campaigns carried on by Babylon against Blam in the reigns of Hammurabi
and Samsu-iluna would have afforded him the opportunity of establishing
a firm foothold in the Country of the Sea without the risk of Babylonian
interference. If, on the other hand, it was in the earlier part of his
reign that hostilities with Babylon broke out, we may suppose that,
while Samsu-iluna was devoting all his energies to crush Bim-Sin, the
Country of the Sea declared her independence of Babylonian control. In
this case we may imagine Samsu-iluna hurrying south, on the conclusion
of his Elamite campaign, to crush the newly formed state before it had
had time to organize its forces for prolonged resistance.

Whichever of these alternatives eventually may prove to be correct, it
is certain that Samsu-iluna took the initiative in Babylon’s struggle
with the Country of the Sea, and that his action was due either to her
declaration of independence or to some daring act of aggression on the
part of this small state which had hitherto appeared too insignificant
to cause Babylon any serious trouble. The new chronicle tells us that
Samsu-iluna undertook two expeditions against the Country of the Sea,
both of which proved unsuccessful. In the first of these he penetrated
to the very shores of the Persian Gulf, where a battle took place in
which Samsu-iluna was defeated, and the bodies of many of the Babylonian
soldiers were washed away by the sea. In the second campaign Iluma-ilu
did not await Samsu-iluna’s attack, but advanced to meet him, and again
defeated the Babylonian army. In the reign of Abêshu’, Samsu-iluna’s
son and successor, Iluma-ilu appears to have undertaken fresh acts of
aggression against Babylon; and it was probably during one of his raids
in Babylonian territory that Abêshu’ attempted to crush the growing power
of the Country of the Sea by the capture of its daring leader, Iluma-ilu
himself. The new chronicle informs us that, with this object in
view, Abêshu’ dammed the river Tigris, hoping by this means to cut off
Iluma-ilu and his army, but his stratagem did not succeed, and Iluma-ilu
got back to his own territory in safety.

The new chronicle does not supply us with further details of the
struggle between Babylon and the Country of the Sea, but we may conclude
that all similar attempts on the part of the later kings of the First
Dynasty to crush or restrain the power of the new state were useless. It
is probable that from this time forward the kings of the First Dynasty
accepted the independence of the Country of the Sea upon their southern
border as an evil which they were powerless to prevent. They must have
looked back with regret to the good times the country had enjoyed under
the powerful sway of Hammurabi, whose victorious arms even their ancient
foes, the Blamites, had been unable to withstand. But, although the
chronicle does not recount the further successes achieved by the Country
of the Sea, it records a fact which undoubtedly contributed to hasten
the fall of Babylon and bring the First Dynasty to an end. It tells us
that in the reign of Samsu-ditana, the last king of the First Dynasty,
the men of the land of Khattu (the Hittites from Northern Syria) marched
against him in order to conquer the land of Akkad; in other words, they
marched down the Euphrates and invaded Northern Babylonia. The chronicle
does not state how far the invasion was successful, but the appearance
of a new enemy from the northwest must have divided the Babylonian
forces and thus have reduced their power of resisting pressure from the
Country of the Sea. Samsu-ditana may have succeeded in defeating the
Hittites and in driving them from his country; but the fact that he
was the last king of the First Dynasty proves that in his reign Babylon
itself fell into the hands of the king of the Country of the Sea.

The question now arises, To what race did the people of the Country
of the Sea belong? Did they represent an advance-guard of the Kassite
tribes, who eventually succeeded in establishing themselves as the Third
Dynasty in Babylon? Or were they the Elamites who, when driven from Ur
and Larsam, retreated southwards and maintained their independence on
the shores of the Persian Gulf? Or did they represent some fresh wave of
Semitic immigration’? That they were not Kassites is proved by the new
chronicle which relates how the Country of the Sea was conquered by the
Kassites, and how the dynasty founded by Iluma-ilu thus came to an end.
There is nothing to show that they were Elamites, and if the Country of
the Sea had been colonized by fresh Semitic tribes, so far from opposing
their kindred in Babylon, most probably they would have proved to them
a source of additional strength and support. In fact, there are
indications that the people of the Country of the Sea are to be referred
to an older stock than the Elamites, the Semites, or the Kassites. In
the dynasty of the Country of the Sea there is no doubt that we may
trace the last successful struggle of the ancient Sumerians to retain
possession of the land which they had held for so many centuries before
the invading Semites had disputed its possession with them.

Evidence of the Sumerian origin of the kings of the Country of the
Sea may be traced in the names which several of them bear. Ishkibal,
Grulkishar, Peshgal-daramash, A-dara-kalama, Akur-ul-ana, and
Melam-kur-kura, the names of some of them, are all good Sumerian names,
and Shushshi, the brother of Ishkibal, may also be taken as a Sumerian
name. It is true that the first three kings of the dynasty, Iluma-ilu,
Itti-ili-nibi, and Damki-ilishu, and the last king of the dynasty,
Ea-gamil, bear Semitic Babylonian names, but there is evidence that
at least one of these is merely a Semitic rendering of a Sumerian
equivalent. Iluma-ilu, the founder of the dynasty, has left inscriptions
in which his name is written in its correct Sumerian form as
Dingir-a-an, and the fact that he and some of his successors either bore
Semitic names or appear in the late list of kings with their Sumerian
names translated into Babylonian form may be easily explained by
supposing that the population of the Country of the Sea was mixed and
that the Sumerian and Semitic tongues were to a great extent employed
indiscriminately. This supposition is not inconsistent with the
suggestion that the dynasty of the Country of the Sea was Sumerian, and
that under it the Sumerians once more became the predominant race in
Babylonia.

The new chronicle also relates how the dynasty of the Country of the
Sea succumbed in its turn before the incursions of the Kassites. We know
that already under the First Dynasty the Kassite tribes had begun to
make incursions into Babylonia, for the ninth year of Samsu-iluna was
named in the date-formulae after a Kassite invasion, which, as it
was commemorated in this manner by the Babylonians, was probably
successfully repulsed. Such invasions must have taken place from time to
time during the period of supremacy attained by the Country of the Sea,
and it was undoubtedly with a view to stopping such incursions--for the
future that Ea-gamil--the last king of the Second Dynasty, decided to
invade Elam and conquer the mountainous districts in which the Kassite
tribes had built their strongholds. This Elamite campaign of Ea-gamil
is recorded by the new chronicle, which relates how he was defeated and
driven from the country by Ulam-Buriash, the brother of Bitiliash the
Kassite. Ulam-Buriash did not rest content with repelling Ea-gamil’s
invasion of his land, but pursued him across the border and succeeded
in conquering the Country of the Sea and in establishing there his own
administration. The gradual conquest of the whole of Babylonia by the
Kassites no doubt followed the conquest of the Country of the Sea,
for the chronicle relates how the process of subjugation, begun by
Ulam-Buriash, was continued by his nephew Agum, and we know from the
lists of kings that Ea-gamil was the last king of the dynasty founded by
Iluma-ilu. In this fashion the Second Dynasty was brought to an end, and
the Sumerian element in the mixed population of Babylonia did not again
succeed in gaining control of the government of the country.

It will be noticed that the account of the earliest Kassite rulers of
Babylonia which is given by the new chronicle does not exactly tally
with the names of the kings of the Third Dynasty as found upon the
list of kings. On this document the first king of the dynasty is named
Gandash, with whom we may probably identify Ulam-Buriash, the Kassite
conqueror of the Country of the Sea; the second king is Agum, and the
third is Bitiliashi. According to the new chronicle Agum was the son
of Bitiliashi, and it would be improbable that he should have ruled in
Babylonia before his father. But this difficulty is removed by supposing
that the two names were transposed by some copyist. The different
names assigned to the founder of the Kassite dynasty may be due to
the existence of variant traditions, or Ulam-Buriash may have assumed
another name on his conquest of Babylonia, a practice which was usual
with the later kings of Assyria when they occupied the Babylonian
throne.

The information supplied by the new chronicle with regard to the
relations of the first three dynasties to one another is of the greatest
possible interest to the student of early Babylonian history. We see
that the Semitic empire founded at Babylon by Sumu-abu, and consolidated
by Hammurabi, was not established on so firm a basis as has hitherto
been believed. The later kings of the dynasty, after Elam had been
conquered, had to defend their empire from encroachments on the south,
and they eventually succumbed before the onslaught of the Sumerian
element, which still remained in the population of Babylonia and had
rallied in the Country of the Sea. This dynasty in its turn succumbed
before the invasion of the Kassites from the mountains in the western
districts of Elam, and, although the city of Babylon retained her
position as the capital of the country throughout these changes of
government, she was the capital of rulers of different races, who
successively fought for and obtained the control of the fertile plains
of Mesopotamia.

It is probable that the Kassite kings of the Third Dynasty exercised
authority not only over Babylonia but also over the greater part of
Elam, for a number of inscriptions of Kassite kings of Babylonia have
been found by M. de Morgan at Susa. These inscriptions consist of
grants of land written on roughly shaped stone stelæ, a class which the
Babylonians themselves called _kudurru_, while they have been frequently
referred to by modern writers as “boundary-stones.” This latter term
is not very happily chosen, for it suggests that the actual monuments
themselves were set up on the limits of a field or estate to mark its
boundary. It is true that the inscription on a kudurru enumerates the
exact position and size of the estate with which it is concerned,
but the kudurru was never actually used to mark the boundary. It was
preserved as a title-deed, in the house of the owner of the estate or
possibly in the temple of his god, and formed his charter or title-deed
to which he could appeal in case of any dispute arising as to his right
of ownership. One of the kudurrus found by M. de Morgan records the
grant of a number of estates near Babylon by Nazimaruttash, a king of
the Third or Kassite Dynasty, to the god Marduk, that is to say they
were assigned by the king to the service of E-sagila, the great temple
of Marduk at Babylon.

[Illustration: 256.jpg A KUDURRU OR “BOUNDARY-STONE.”]

     Inscribed with a text of Nazimaruttash, a king of the Third
     or Kassite Dynasty, conferring certain estates near Babylon
     on the temple of Marduk and on a certain man named Kashakti-
     Shugab. The photograph is reproduced from M. de Morgan’s
     Delegation en Perse, Mêm., t. ii, pi, 18.

All the crops and produce from the land were granted for the supply of
the temple, which was to enjoy the property without the payment of any
tax or tribute. The text also records the gift of considerable tracts of
land in the same district to a private individual named Kashakti-Shugab,
who was to enjoy a similar freedom from taxation so far as the lands
bestowed upon him were concerned.

This freedom from taxation is specially enacted by the document in
the words: “Whensoever in the days that are to come the ruler of the
country, or one of the governors, or directors, or wardens of these
districts, shall make any claim with regard to these estates, or shall
attempt to impose the payment of a tithe or tax upon them, may all the
great gods whose names are commemorated, or whose arms are portrayed, or
whose dwelling-places are represented, on this stone, curse him with an
evil curse and blot out his name!”

Incidentally, this curse illustrates one of the most striking
characteristics of the kudurrus, or “boundary-stones,” viz. the carved
figures of gods and representations of their emblems, which all of them
bare in addition to the texts inscribed upon them. At one time it was
thought that these symbols were to be connected with the signs of the
zodiac and various constellations and stars, and it was suggested that
they might have been intended to represent the relative positions of the
heavenly bodies at the time the document was drawn up. But this text
of Nazimaruttash and other similar documents that have recently been
discovered prove that the presence of the figures and emblems of the
gods upon the stones is to be explained on another and far more simple
theory. They were placed there as guardians of the property to which the
kudurru referred, and it was believed that the carving of their figures
or emblems upon the stone would ensure their intervention in case of
any attempted infringement of the rights and privileges which it was
the object of the document to commemorate and preserve. A photographic
reproduction of one side of the kudurru of Nazi-maruttash is shown in
the accompanying illustration. There will be seen a representation of
Gula or Bau, the mother of the gods, who is portrayed as seated on
her throne and wearing the four-horned head-dress and a long robe
that reaches to her feet. In the field are emblems of the Sun-god, the
Moon-god, Ishtar, and other deities, and the representation of divine
emblems and dwelling-places is continued on another face of the stone
round the corner towards which Grula is looking. The other two faces of
the document are taken up with the inscription.

An interesting note is appended to the text inscribed upon the stone,
beginning under the throne and feet of Marduk and continuing under the
emblems of the gods upon the other side. This note relates the history
of the document in the following words: “In those days Kashakti-Shugab,
the son of Nusku-na’id, inscribed (this document) upon a memorial
of clay, and he set it before his god. But in the reign of
Marduk-aplu-iddina, king of hosts, the son of Melishikhu, King
of Babylon, the wall fell upon this memorial and crushed it.
Shu-khuli-Shugab, the son of Nibishiku, wrote a copy of the ancient
text upon a new stone stele, and he set it (before the god).” It will be
seen, therefore, that this actual stone that has been recovered was not
the document drawn up in the reign of Nazimaruttash, but a copy made
under Marduk-aplu-iddina, a later king of the Third Dynasty. The
original deed was drawn up to preserve the rights of Kashakti-Shugab,
who shared the grant of land with the temple of Marduk. His share was
less than half that of the temple, but, as both were situated in the
same district, he was careful to enumerate and describe the temple’s
share, to prevent any encroachment on his rights by the Babylonian
priests.

It is probable that such grants of land were made to private individuals
in return for special services which they had rendered to the king. Thus
a broken kudurru among M. de Morgan’s finds records the confirmation of
a man’s claims to certain property by Biti-liash II, the claims being
based on a grant made to the man’s ancestor by Kurigalzu for services
rendered to the king during his war with Assyria. One of the finest
specimens of this class of charters or title-deeds has been found at
Susa, dating from the reign of Melishikhu, a king of the Third Dynasty.
The document in question records a grant of certain property in the
district of Bît-Pir-Shadû-rabû, near the cities Agade and Dûr-Kurigalzu,
made by Melishikhu to Marduk-aplu-iddina, his son, who succeeded him
upon the throne of Babylon. The text first gives details with regard to
the size and situation of the estates included in the grant of land, and
it states the names of the high officials who were entrusted with the
duty of measuring them. The remainder of the text defines and secures
the privileges granted to Marduk-aplu-iddina together with the land,
and, as it throws considerable light upon the system of land tenure at
the period, an extract from it may here be translated:

“To prevent the encroachment on his land,” the inscription runs, “thus
hath he (i.e. the king) established his (Marduk-aplu-iddina’s) charter.
On his land taxes and tithes shall they not impose; ditches, limits, and
boundaries shall they not displace; there shall be no plots, stratagems,
or claims (with regard to his possession); for forced labour or public
work for the prevention of floods, for the maintenance and repair of
the royal canal under the protection of the towns of Bit-Sikkamidu
and Damik-Adad, among the gangs levied in the towns of the district of
Ninâ-Agade, they shall not call out the people of his estate; they are
not liable to forced labour on the sluices of the royal canal, nor
are they liable for building dams, nor for closing the canal, nor for
digging out the bed thereof.”

[Illustration: 260.jpg KUOTTRRU, OR “BOUNDARY-STONE.”]

     Inscribed with a text of Melishikhu, one of the kings of the
     Third or Kassite Dynasty of Babylon, recording a grant of
     certain property to Marduk-aplu-iddina, his son The
     photograph is reproduced from M. de Morgan’s Delegation en
     Perse, Mem., t. ii, pi. 24.

“A cultivator of his lands, whether hired or belonging to the estate,
and the men who receive his instructions (i.e. his overseers) shall no
governor of Bît-Pir-Shadû-rabû cause to leave his lands, whether by the
order of the king, or by the order of the governor, or by the order of
whosoever may be at Bît-Pir-Shadû-rabû. On wood, grass, straw, corn,
and every other sort of crop, on his carts and yoke, on his ass and
man-servant, shall they make no levy. During the scarcity of water in
the canal running between the Bati-Anzanim canal and the canal of the
royal district, on the waters of his ditch for irrigation shall they
make no levy; from the ditch of his reservoir shall they not draw water,
neither shall they divert (his water for) irrigation, and other land
shall they not irrigate nor water therewith. The grass of his lands
shall they not mow; the beasts belonging to the king or to a governor,
which may be assigned to the district of Bît-Pir-Shadû-rabû, shall they
not drive within his boundary, nor shall they pasture them on his grass.
He shall not be forced to build a road or a bridge, whether for the
king, or for the governor who may be appointed in the district of
Bît-Pir-Shadû-rabû, neither shall he be liable for any new form of
forced labour, which in the days that are to come a king, or a governor
appointed in the district of Bît-Pir-Shadû-rabû, shall institute and
exact, nor for forced labour long fallen into disuse which may be
revived anew. To prevent encroachment on his land the king hath fixed
the privileges of his domain, and that which appertaineth unto it, and
all that he hath granted unto him; and in the presence of Shamash, and
Marduk, and Anunitu, and the great gods of heaven and earth, he hath
inscribed them upon a stone, and he hath left it as an everlasting
memorial with regard to his estate.”

The whole of the text is too long to quote, and it will suffice to note
here that Melishikhu proceeds to appeal to future kings to respect the
land and privileges which he has granted to his son, Marduk-aplu-iddina,
even as he himself has respected similar grants made by his predecessors
on the throne; and the text ends with some very vivid curses against
any one, whatever his station, who should make any encroachments on the
privileges granted to Marduk-aplu-iddina, or should alter or do any harm
to the memorial-stone itself. The emblems of the gods whom Melishikhu
invokes to avenge any infringement of his grant are sculptured upon one
side of the stone, for, as has already been remarked, it was believed
that by carving them upon the memorial-stone their help in guarding the
stone itself and its enactments was assured.

From the portion of the text inscribed upon the stone which has just
been translated it is seen that the owner of land in Babylonia in the
period of the Kassite kings, unless he was granted special exemption,
was liable to furnish forced labour for public works to the state or to
his district, to furnish grazing and pasture for the flocks and herds of
the king or governor, and to pay various taxes and tithes on his land,
his water for irrigation, and his crops. From the numerous documents
of the First Dynasty of Babylon that have been recovered and published
within the last few years we know that similar customs were prevalent at
that period, so that it is clear that the successive conquests to which
the country was subjected, and the establishment of different dynasties
of foreign kings at Babylon, did not to any appreciable extent affect
the life and customs of the inhabitants of the country or even the
general character of its government and administration. Some documents
of a commercial and legal nature, inscribed upon clay tablets during the
reigns of the Kassite kings of Babylon, have been found at Nippur,
but they have not yet been published, and the information we possess
concerning the life of the people in this period is obtained indirectly
from kudurrus or boundary-stones, such as those of Nazimaruttash and
Melishikhu which have been already described. Of documents relating to
the life of the people under the rule of the kings of the Country of the
Sea we have none, and, with the exception of the unpublished chronicle
which has been described earlier in this chapter, our information for
this period is confined to one or two short votive inscriptions. But the
case is very different with regard to the reigns of the Semitic kings of
the First Dynasty of Babylon. Thousands of tablets relating to legal and
commercial transactions during this period have been recovered, and more
recently a most valuable series of royal letters, written by Hammurabi
and other kings of his dynasty, has been brought to light.

[Illustration: 264.jpg Upper Part of the Stele of Hammurabi, King of
Babylon.]

     The stele is inscribed with his great code of laws. The Sun-
     god is represented as seated on a throne in the form of a
     temple façade, and his feet are resting upon the mountains.
     Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

Moreover, the recently discovered code of laws drawn up by Hammurabi
contains information of the greatest interest with regard to the
conditions of life that were prevalent in Babylonia at that period.
From these three sources it is possible to draw up a comparatively full
account of early Babylonian life and customs.




CHAPTER VI--EARLY BABYLONIAN LIFE AND CUSTOMS


In tracing the ancient history of Mesopotamia and the surrounding
countries it is possible to construct a narrative which has the
appearance of being comparatively full and complete. With regard to
Babylonia it may be shown how dynasty succeeded dynasty, and for long
periods together the names of the kings have been recovered and the
order of their succession fixed with certainty. But the number and
importance of the original documents on which this connected narration
is based vary enormously for different periods. Gaps occur in our
knowledge of the sequence of events, which with some ingenuity may be
bridged over by means of the native lists of kings and the genealogies
furnished by the historical inscriptions. On the other hand, as if to
make up for such parsimony, the excavations have yielded a wealth of
material for illustrating the conditions of early Babylonian life which
prevailed in such periods. The most fortunate of these periods, so far
as the recovery of its records is concerned, is undoubtedly the period
of the Semitic kings of the First Dynasty of Babylon, and in particular
the reign of its greatest ruler, Hammurabi. When M. Maspero wrote his
history, thousands of clay tablets, inscribed with legal and commercial
documents and dated in the reigns of these early kings, had already been
recovered, and the information they furnished was duly summarized by
him.* But since that time two other sources of information have been
made available which have largely increased our knowledge of
the constitution of the early Babylonian state, its system of
administration, and the conditions of life of the various classes of the
population.

     * Most of these tablets are preserved in the British Museum.
     The principal?works in which they have been published are
     Cuneiform Texts in the British Museum (1896, etc.),
     Strassmaier’s Altbabylonischen Vertràge aus Warka, and
     Meissner’s Beitràge zum altbabylonischen Privatrecht. A
     number of similar tablets of this period, preserved in the
     Pennsylvania Museum, will shortly be published by Dr. Ranke.

One of these new sources of information consists of a remarkable series
of royal letters, written by kings of the First Dynasty, which has been
recovered and is now preserved in the British Museum. The letters were
addressed to the governors and high officials of various great cities in
Babylonia, and they contain the king’s orders with regard to details of
the administration of the country which had been brought to his notice.
The range of subjects with which they deal is enormous, and there is
scarcely one of them which does not add to our knowledge of the period.*
The other new source of information is the great code of laws, drawn up
by Hammurabi for the guidance of his people and defining the duties and
privileges of all classes of his subjects, the discovery of which at
Susa has been described in a previous chapter. The laws are engraved on
a great stele of diorite in no less than forty-nine columns of writing,
of which forty-four are preserved,* and at the head of the stele is
sculptured a representation of the king receiving them from Shamash, the
Sun-god.

     * See King, Letters and Inscriptions of Hammurabi, 3 vols.
     (1898-1900).

This code shows to what an extent the administration of law and justice
had been developed in Babylonia in the time of the First Dynasty. From
the contracts and letters of the period we already knew that regular
judges and duly appointed courts of law were in existence, and the code
itself was evidently intended by the king to give the royal sanction to
a great body of legal decisions and enactments which already possessed
the authority conferred by custom and tradition. The means by which such
a code could have come into existence are illustrated by the system of
procedure adopted in the courts at this period. After a case had been
heard and judgment had been given, a summary of the case and of the
evidence, together with the judgment, was drawn up and written out on
tablets in due legal form and phraseology. A list of the witnesses was
appended, and, after the tablet had been dated and sealed, it was stored
away among the legal archives of the court, where it was ready for
production in the event of any future appeal or case in which the
recorded decision was involved. This procedure represents an advanced
stage in the system of judicial administration, but the care which
was taken for the preservation of the judgments given was evidently
traditional, and would naturally give rise in course of time to the
existence of a recognized code of laws.

Moreover, when once a judgment had been given and had been duly recorded
it was irrevocable, and if any judge attempted to alter such a decision
he was severely punished. For not only was he expelled from his
judgment-seat, and debarred from exercising judicial functions in the
future, but, if his judgment had involved the infliction of a penalty,
he was obliged to pay twelve times the amount to the man he had
condemned. Such an enactment must have occasionally given rise to
hardship or injustice, but at least it must have had the effect
of imbuing the judges with a sense of their responsibility and of
instilling a respect for their decisions in the minds of the people. A
further check upon injustice was provided by the custom of the elders of
the city, who sat with the judge and assisted him in the carrying out
of his duties; and it was always open to a man, if he believed that he
could not get justice enforced, to make an appeal to the king. It is not
our present purpose to give a technical discussion of the legal contents
of the code, but rather to examine it with the object of ascertaining
what light it throws upon ancient Babylonian life and customs, and the
conditions under which the people lived.

The code gives a good deal of information with regard to the family life
of the Babylonians, and, above all, proves the sanctity with which the
marriage-tie was invested. The claims that were involved by marriage
were not lightly undertaken. Any marriage, to be legally binding, had to
be accompanied by a duly executed and attested marriage-contract. If a
man had taken a woman to wife without having carried out this necessary
preliminary, the woman was not regarded as his wife in the legal sense.
On the other hand, when once such a marriage-contract had been drawn up,
its inviolability was stringently secured. A case of proved adultery
on the part of a man’s wife was punished by the drowning of the guilty
parties, though the husband of the woman, if he wished to save his wife,
could do so by an appeal to the king. Similarly, death was the penalty
for a man who ravished another man’s betrothed wife while she was still
living in her father’s house, but in this case the girl’s innocence
and inexperience were taken into account, and no penalty was enforced
against her and she was allowed to go free. Where the adultery of a wife
was not proved, and only depended on the accusation of the husband, the
woman could clear herself by swearing her own innocence; if, however,
the accusation was not brought by the husband himself, but by others,
the woman could clear herself by submitting to the ordeal by water; that
is to say, she would plunge into the Euphrates; if the river carried her
away and she were drowned, it was regarded as proof that the accusation
was well founded; if, on the contrary, she survived and got safely
to the bank, she was considered innocent and was forthwith allowed to
return to her household completely vindicated.

It will have been seen that the duty of chastity on the part of a
married woman was strictly enforced, but the husband’s responsibility to
properly maintain his wife was also recognized, and in the event of
his desertion she could under certain circumstances become the wife of
another man. Thus, if he left his city and fled from it of his own free
will and deserted his wife, he could not reclaim her on his return,
since he had not been forced to leave the city, but had done so because
he hated it. This rule did not apply to the case of a man who was taken
captive in battle. In such circumstances the wife’s action was to be
guided by the condition of her husband’s affairs. If the captive husband
possessed sufficient property on which his wife could be maintained
during his captivity in a strange land, she had no reason nor excuse
for seeking another marriage. If under these circumstances she became
another man’s wife, she was to be prosecuted at law, and, her action
being the equivalent of adultery, she was to be drowned. But the case
was regarded as altered if the captive husband had not sufficient means
for the maintenance of his wife during his absence. The woman would then
be thrown on her own resources, and if she became the wife of another
man she incurred no blame. On the return of the captive he could reclaim
his wife, but the children of the second marriage would remain with
their own father. These regulations for the conduct of a woman, whose
husband was captured in battle, give an intimate picture of the manner
in which the constant wars of this early period affected the lives of
those who took part in them.

Under the Babylonians at the period of the First Dynasty divorce was
strictly regulated, though it was far easier for the man to obtain one
than for the woman. If we may regard the copies of Sumerian laws, which
have come down to us from the late Assyrian period, as parts of the code
in use under the early Sumerians, we must conclude that at this earlier
period the law was still more in favour of the husband, who could
divorce his wife whenever he so desired, merely paying her half a mana
as compensation. Under the Sumerians the wife could not obtain a
divorce at all, and the penalty for denying her husband was death. These
regulations were modified in favour of the woman in Hammurabi’s code;
for under its provisions, if a man divorced his wife or his concubine,
he was obliged to make proper provision for her maintenance. Whether
she were barren or had borne him children, he was obliged to return
her marriage portion; and in the latter case she had the custody of the
children, for whose maintenance and education he was obliged to furnish
the necessary supplies. Moreover, at the man’s death she and her
children would inherit a share of his property. When there had been no
marriage portion, a sum was fixed which the husband was obliged to pay
to his divorced wife, according to his status. In cases where the wife
was proved to have wasted her household and to have entirely failed in
her duty, her husband could divorce her without paying any compensation,
or could make her a slave in his house, and the extreme penalty for
this offence was death. On the other hand, a woman could not be divorced
because she had contracted a permanent disease; and, if she desired to
divorce her husband and could prove that her past life had been seemly,
she could do so, returning to her father’s house and taking her marriage
portion with her.

It is not necessary here to go very minutely into the regulations given
by the code with regard to marriage portions, the rights of widows,
the laws of inheritance, and the laws regulating the adoption and
maintenance of children. The customs that already have been described
with regard to marriage and divorce may serve to indicate the spirit
in which the code is drawn up and the recognized status occupied by the
wife in the Babylonian household. The extremely independent position
enjoyed by women in the early Babylonian days is illustrated by the
existence of a special class of women, to which constant reference is
made in the contracts and letters of the period. When the existence of
this class of women was first recognized from the references to them in
the contract-tablets inscribed at the time of the First Dynasty, they
were regarded as priestesses, but the regulations concerning them which
occur in the code of Hammurabi prove that their duties were not strictly
sacerdotal, but that they occupied the position of votaries. The
majority of those referred to in the inscriptions of this period
were vowed to the service of E-bab-bara, the temple of the Sun-god at
Sippara, and of E-sagila, the great temple of Marduk at Babylon, but
it is probable that all the great temples in the country had classes of
female votaries attached to them. From the evidence at present
available it may be concluded that the functions of these women bore no
resemblance to that of the sacred prostitutes devoted to the service of
the goddess Ishtar in the city of Erech. They seem to have occupied a
position of great influence and independence in the community, and
their duties and privileges were defined and safeguarded by special
legislation.

Generally they lived together in a special building, or convent,
attached to the temple, but they had considerable freedom and could
leave the convent and also contract marriage. Their vows, however,
while securing them special privileges, entailed corresponding
responsibilities. Even when married a votary was still obliged to remain
a virgin, and, should her husband desire to have children, she could not
bear them herself, but must provide him with a maid or concubine. Also
she had to maintain a high standard of moral conduct, for any breach
of which severe penalties were enforced. Thus, if a votary who was not
living in the convent opened a beer-shop, or should enter one for drink,
she ran the risk of being put to death. But the privileges she enjoyed
were also considerable, for even when unmarried she enjoyed the status
of a married woman, and if any man slandered her he incurred the penalty
of branding on the forehead. Moreover, a married votary, though she
could not bear her husband children, was secured in her position as the
permanent head of his household. The concubine she might give to her
husband was always the wife’s inferior, even after bearing him children,
and should the former attempt to put herself on a level of equality with
the votary, the latter might brand her as a slave and put her with the
female slaves. If the concubine proved barren she could be sold. The
votary could also possess property, and on taking her vows was provided
with a portion by her father exactly as though she were being given
in marriage. Her portion was vested in herself and did not become the
property of the order of votaries, nor of the temple to which she
was attached. The proceeds of her property were devoted to her own
maintenance, and on her father’s death her brothers looked after
her interests, or she might farm the property out. Under certain
circumstances she could inherit property and was not obliged to pay
taxes on it, and such property she could bequeath at her own death; but
upon her death her portion returned to her own family unless her father
had assigned her the privilege of bequeathing it. That the social
position enjoyed by a votary was considerable is proved by the fact that
many women of good family, and even members of the royal house, took
vows. The existence of the order and its high repute indicate a
very advanced conception of the position of women among the early
Babylonians.

From the code of Hammurabi we also gather considerable information with
regard to the various classes of which the community was composed and
to their relative social positions. For the purposes of legislation
the community was divided into three main classes or sections, which
corresponded to well-defined strata in the social system. The lowest
of these classes consisted of the slaves, who must have formed a
considerable portion of the population. The class next above them
comprised the large body of free men, who were possessed of a certain
amount of property but were poor and humble, as their name, _muslikênu_,
implied. These we may refer to as the middle class. The highest, or
upper class, in the Babylonian community embraced all the officers and
ministers attached to the court, the higher officials and servants
of the state, and the owners of considerable lands and estates. The
differences which divided and marked off from one another the two great
classes of free men in the population of Babylonia is well illustrated
by the scale of payments as compensation for injury which they were
obliged to make or were entitled to receive. Thus, if a member of the
upper class were guilty of stealing an ox, or a sheep, or an ass, or
a pig, or a boat, from a temple or a private house, he had to pay the
owner thirty times its value as compensation, whereas if the thief were
a member of the middle class he only had to pay ten times its price, but
if he had no property and so could not pay compensation he was put to
death. The penalty for manslaughter was less if the assailant was a man
of the middle class, and such a man could also divorce his wife more
cheaply, and was privileged to pay his doctor or surgeon a smaller fee
for a successful operation.

But the privileges enjoyed by a man of the middle class were
counterbalanced by a corresponding diminution of the value at which
his life and limbs were assessed. Thus, if a doctor by carrying out an
operation unskilfully caused the death of a member of the upper class,
or inflicted a serious injury upon him, such as the loss of an eye, the
punishment was the amputation of both hands, but no such penalty seems
to have been exacted if the patient were a member of the middle class.
If, however, the patient were a slave of a member of the middle class,
in the event of death under the operation, the doctor had to give the
owner another slave, and in the event of the slave losing his eye, he
had to pay the owner half the slave’s value. Penalties for assault were
also regulated in accordance with the social position and standing
of the parties to the quarrel. Thus, if one member of the upper class
knocked out the eye or the tooth of one of his equals, his own eye or
his own tooth was knocked out as a punishment, and if he broke the limb
of one of the members of his own class, he had his corresponding limb
broken; but if he knocked out the eye of a member of the middle class,
or broke his limb, he suffered no punishment in his own person, but was
fined one mana of silver, and for knocking out the tooth of such a man
he was fined one-third of a mana. If two members of the same class were
engaged in a quarrel, and one of them made a peculiarly improper assault
upon the other, the assailant was only fined, the fine being larger
if the quarrel was between members of the upper class. But if such an
assault was made by one man upon another who was of higher rank than
himself, the assailant was punished by being publicly beaten in the
presence of the assembly, when he received sixty stripes from a scourge
of ox-hide. These regulations show the privileges and responsibilities
which pertained to the two classes of free men in the Babylonian
community, and they indicate the relative social positions which they
enjoyed.

Both classes of free men could own slaves, though it is obvious that
they were more numerous in the households and on the estates of members
of the upper class. The slave was the absolute property of his master
and could be bought and sold and employed as a deposit for a debt,
but, though slaves as a class had few rights of their own, in certain
circumstances they could acquire them. Thus, if the owner of a female
slave had begotten children by her he could not use her as the payment
for a debt, and in the event of his having done so he was obliged to
ransom her by paying the original amount of the debt in money. It was
also possible for a male slave, whether owned by a member of the upper
or of the middle class, to marry a free woman, and if he did so, his
children were free and did not become the property of his master. Also,
if the free woman whom the slave married brought with her a marriage
portion from her father’s house, this remained her own property on the
slave’s death, and supposing the couple had acquired other property
during the time they lived together as man and wife, the owner of the
slave could only claim half of such property, the other half being
retained by the free woman for her own use and for that of her children.

Generally speaking, the lot of the slave was not a particularly hard
one, for he was a recognized member of his owner’s household, and, as a
valuable piece of property, it was obviously to his owner’s interest to
keep him healthy and in good condition. In fact, the value of the slave
is attested by the severity of the penalty imposed for abducting a male
or female slave from the owner’s house and removing him or her from
the city; for a man guilty of this offence was put to death. The same
penalty was imposed for harbouring and taking possession of a runaway
slave, whereas a fixed reward was paid by the owner to any one by whom
a runaway slave was captured and brought back. Special legislation was
also devised with the object of rendering the theft of slaves difficult
and their detection easy. Thus, if a brander put a mark upon a slave
without the owner’s consent, he was liable to have his hands cut off,
and if he could prove that he did so through being deceived by another
man, that man was put to death. For bad offences slaves were liable to
severe punishments, such as cutting off the ear, which was the penalty
for denying his master, and also for making an aggravated assault on a
member of the upper class of free men. But it is clear that on the whole
the slave was well looked after. He was also not condemned to remain
perpetually a slave, for while still in his master’s service it was
possible for him, under certain conditions, to acquire property of his
own, and if he did so he was able with his master’s consent to purchase
his freedom. If a slave were captured by the enemy and taken to a
foreign land and sold, and were then brought back by his new owner to
his own country, he could claim his liberty without having to pay any
purchase-money to either of his masters.

The code of Hammurabi also contains detailed regulations concerning the
duties of debtors and creditors, and it throws an interesting light
on the commercial life of the Babylonians at this early period. For
instance, it reveals the method by which a wealthy man, or a merchant,
extended his business and obtained large profits by trading with other
towns. This he did by employing agents who were under certain fixed
obligations to him, but acted independently so far as their trading was
concerned. From the merchant these agents would receive money or grain
or wool or oil or any sort of goods wherewith to trade, and in return
they paid a fixed share of their profits, retaining the remainder as
the recompense for their own services. They were thus the earliest of
commercial travellers. In order to prevent fraud between the merchant
and the agent special regulations were framed for the dealings they had
with one another. Thus, when the agent received from the merchant the
money or goods to trade with, it was enacted that he should at the time
of the transaction give a properly executed receipt for the amount he
had received. Similarly, if the agent gave the merchant money in return
for the goods he had received and in token of his good faith, the
merchant had to give a receipt to the agent, and in reckoning their
accounts after the agent’s return from his journey, only such amounts as
were specified in the receipts were to be regarded as legal obligations.
If the agent forgot to obtain his proper receipt he did so at his own
risk.

[Illustration: 280.jpg CLAY CONTRACT TABLET AND ITS OUTER CASE]

     Dating from the period of the First Dynasty of Babylon.

Travelling at this period was attended with some risk, as it is in the
East at the present day, and the caravan with which an agent travelled
was liable to attack from brigands, or it might be captured by enemies
of the country from which it set out. It was right that loss from this
cause should not be borne by the agent, who by trading with the goods
was risking his own life, but should fall upon the merchant who had
merely advanced the goods and was safe in his own city. It is plain,
however, that disputes frequently arose in consequence of the loss of
goods through a caravan being attacked and robbed, for the code states
clearly the responsibility of the merchant in the matter. If in the
course of his journey an enemy had forced the agent to give up some of
the goods he was carrying, on his return the agent had to specify the
amount on oath, and he was then acquitted of all responsibility in the
matter. If he attempted to cheat his employer by misappropriating the
money or goods advanced to him, on being convicted of the offence before
the elders of the city, he was obliged to repay the merchant three times
the amount he had taken. On the other hand, if the merchant attempted
to defraud his agent by denying that the due amount had been returned to
him, he was obliged on conviction to pay the agent six times the amount
as compensation. It will thus be seen that the law sought to protect the
agent from the risk of being robbed by his more powerful employer.

The merchant sometimes furnished the agent with goods which he was to
dispose of in the best markets he could find in the cities and towns
along his route, and sometimes he would give the agent money with which
to purchase goods in foreign cities for sale on his return. If the
venture proved successful the merchant and his agent shared the profits
between them, but if the agent made bad bargains he had to refund to the
merchant the value of the goods he had received; if the merchant had not
agreed to risk losing any profit, the amount to be refunded to him was
fixed at double the value of the goods advanced.

[Illustration: 282.jpg A TRACK IN THE DESERT.]

This last enactment gives an indication of the immense profits which
were obtained by both the merchant and the agent from this system of
foreign trade, for it is clear that what was regarded fair profit for
the merchant was double the value of the goods disposed of. The profits
of a successful journey would also include a fair return to the agent
for the trouble and time involved in his undertaking. Many of the
contract tablets of this early period relate to such commercial
journeys, which show that various bargains were made between the
different parties interested, and sometimes such contracts, or
partnerships, were entered into, not for a single journey only, but for
long periods. We may therefore conclude that at the time of the First
Dynasty of Babylon, and probably for long centuries before that period,
the great trade-routes of the East were crowded with traffic. With the
exception that donkeys and asses were employed for beasts of burden and
were not supplemented by horses and camels until a much later period, a
camping-ground in the desert on one of the great trade-routes must have
presented a scene similar to that of a caravan camping in the desert at
the present day.

[Illustration: 283.jpg A CAMPING-GROUND IN THE DESERT, BETWEEN BIREJIK
AND URFA.]

The rough tracks beaten by the feet of men and beasts are the same
to-day as they were in that remote period. We can imagine a body of
these early travellers approaching a walled city at dusk and hastening
their pace to get there before the gates were shut. Such a picture as
that of the approach to the city of Samarra, with its mediaeval walls,
may be taken as having had its counterpart in many a city of the early
Babylonians. The caravan route leads through the desert to the city
gate, and if we substitute two massive temple towers for the domes of
the mosques that rise above the wall, little else in the picture need be
changed.

[Illustration: 284.jpg APPROACH TO THE CITY OF SAMARRA, SITUATED ON THE
LEFT BANK OF THE TIGRIS.]

     A small caravan is here seen approaching the city at sunset
     before the gates are shut. Samarra was only founded in A. D.
     834, by the Khalif el-Motasim, the son of Harûn er-Rashîd,
     but customs in the East do not change, and the photograph
     may be used to illustrate the approach of an early
     Babylonian caravan to a walled city of the period.

The houses, too, at this period must have resembled the structures of
unburnt brick of the present day, with their flat mud tops, on which
the inmates sleep at night during the hot season, supported on poles
and brushwood. The code furnishes evidence that at that time, also, the
houses were not particularly well built and were liable to fall, and,
in the event of their doing so, it very justly fixes the responsibility
upon the builder. It is clear from the penalties for bad workmanship
enforced upon the builder that considerable abuses had existed in the
trade before the time of Hammurabi, and it is not improbable that the
enforcement of the penalties succeeded in stamping them out. Thus, if
a builder built a house for a man, and his work was not sound and the
house fell and crushed the owner so that he died, it was enacted that
the builder himself should be put to death. If the fall of the house
killed the owner’s son, the builder’s own son was to be put to death.

[Illustration: 285.jpg A SMALL CARAVAN IN THE MOUNTAINS OF KURDISTAN.]

If one or more of the owner’s slaves were killed, the builder had to
restore him slave for slave. Any damage which the owner’s goods might
have suffered from the fall of the house was to be made good by the
builder. In addition to these penalties the builder was obliged to
rebuild the house, or any portion of it that had fallen through
not being properly secured, at his own cost. On the other hand, due
provisions were made for the payment of the builder for sound work; and
as the houses of the period rarely, if ever, consisted of more than one
story, the scale of payment was fixed by the area of ground covered by
the building.

[Illustration: 286.jpg THE CITY OF MOSUL.]

     Situated on the right bank of the Tigris opposite the mounds
     which mark the site of the ancient city of Nineveh. The
     flat-roof ednouses which may be distinguished in the
     photograph are very similar in form and construction to
     those employed by the ancient Assyrians and Babylonians.

From the code of Hammurabi we also gain considerable information with
regard to agricultural pursuits in ancient Babylonia, for elaborate
regulations are given concerning the landowner’s duties and
responsibilities, and his relations to his tenants. The usual practice
in hiring land for cultivation was for the tenant to pay his rent in
kind, by assigning a certain proportion of the crop, generally a third
or a half, to the owner. If a tenant hired certain land for cultivation
he was bound to till it and raise a crop, and should he neglect to do
so he had to pay the owner what was reckoned as the average rent of the
land, and he had also to break up the land and plough it before handing
it back. As the rent of a field was usually reckoned at harvest, and its
amount depended on the size of the crop, it was only fair that damage to
the crop from flood or storm should not be made up by the tenant; thus
it was enacted by the code that any loss from such a cause should be
shared equally by the owner of the field and the farmer, though if the
latter had already paid his rent at the time the damage occurred he
could not make a claim for repayment.

[Illustration: 287.jpg THE VILLAGE OF NEBI YUNUS.]

     Built on one of the mounds marking the site of the Assyrian
     city of Nineveh. The mosque in the photograph is built over
     the traditional site of the prophet Jonah’s tomb. The flat-
     roofed houses of the modern dwellers on the mound can be
     well seen in the picture.

It is clear from the enactments of the code that disputes were frequent,
not only between farmers and landowners, but also between farmers and
shepherds. It is certain that the latter, in the attempt to find pasture
for the flocks, often allowed their sheep to feed off the farmers’ fields
in the spring. This practice the code set itself to prevent by fixing a
scale of compensation to be paid by any shepherd who caused his sheep to
graze on cultivated land without the owner’s consent. If the offence was
committed in the early spring, when the crop was still small, the farmer
was to harvest the crop and receive a considerable price in kind as
compensation for the shepherd. But if it occurred later on in the
spring, when the sheep had been brought in from the meadows and turned
into the great common field at the city gate, the offence would less
probably be due to accident and the damage to the crop would be greater.
In these circumstances the shepherd had to take over the crop and pay
the farmer very heavily for his loss.

[Illustration: 288.jpg Portrait-sculpture of Hammurabi, King of Babylon]

     From a stone slab in the British Museum.

The planting of gardens and orchards was encouraged, and a man was
allowed to use a field for this purpose without paying a yearly rent. He
might plant it and tend it for four years, and in the fifth year of
his tenancy the original owner of the field took half of the garden
in payment, while the other half the planter of the garden kept for
himself. If a bare patch had been left in the garden it was to be
reckoned in the planter’s half. Regulations were framed to ensure the
proper carrying out of the planting, for if the tenant neglected to do
this during the first four years, he was still liable to plant the plot
he had taken without receiving his half, and he had to pay the owner
compensation in addition, which varied in amount according to the
original condition of the land. If a man hired a garden, the rent he
paid to the owner was fixed at two-thirds of its produce. Detailed
regulations are also given in the code concerning the hire of cattle
and asses, and the compensation to be paid to the owner for the loss or
ill-treatment of his beasts. These are framed on the just principle that
the hirer was responsible only for damage or loss which he could have
reasonably prevented. Thus, if a lion killed a hired ox or ass in the
open country, or if an ox was killed by lightning, the loss fell upon
the owner and not on the man who hired the beast. But if the hirer
killed the ox through carelessness or by beating it unmercifully, or if
the beast broke its leg while in his charge, he had to restore another
ox to the owner in place of the one he had hired. For lesser damages to
the beast the hirer had to pay compensation on a fixed scale. Thus, if
the ox had its eye knocked out during the period of its hire, the man
who hired it had to pay to the owner half its value; while for a broken
horn, the loss of the tail, or a torn muzzle, he paid a quarter of the
value of the beast.

Fines were also levied for carelessness in looking after cattle, though
in cases of damage or injury, where carelessness could not be proved,
the owner of a beast was not held responsible. A bull might go wild at
any time and gore a man, however careful and conscientious the owner
might be, and in these circumstances the injured man could not bring an
action against the owner. But if a bull had already gored a man, and,
although it was known to be vicious, the owner had not blunted its horns
or shut it up, in the event of its goring and killing a free man, he had
to pay half a mana of silver. One-third of a mana was the price paid for
a slave who was killed. A landed proprietor who might hire farmers to
cultivate his fields inflicted severe fines for acts of dishonesty with
regard to the cattle, provender, or seed-corn committed to their charge.
If a man stole the provender for the cattle he had to make it good, and
he was also liable to the punishment of having his hands cut off. In
the event of his being convicted of letting out the oxen for hire, or
stealing the seed-corn so that he did not produce a crop, he had to pay
very heavy compensation, and, if he could not pay, he was liable to be
torn to pieces by the oxen in the field he should have cultivated.

In a dry land like Babylonia, where little rain falls and that in only
one season of the year, the irrigation of his fields forms one of the
most important duties of the agriculturist. The farmer leads the water
to his fields along small irrigation-canals or channels above the level
of the soil, their sides being formed of banks of earth. It is clear
that similar methods were employed by the early Babylonians. One such
channel might supply the fields of several farmers, and it was the duty
of each man through whose land the channel flowed to keep its banks on
his land in repair. If he omitted to strengthen his bank or dyke, and
the water forced a breach and flooded his neighbour’s field, he had to
pay compensation in kind for any crop that was ruined; while if he could
not pay, he and his goods were sold, and his neighbours, whose fields
had been damaged through his carelessness, shared the money.

The land of Babylonian farmers was prepared for irrigation before it was
sown by being divided into a number of small square or oblong tracts,
each separated from the others by a low bank of earth, the seed being
afterwards sown within the small squares or patches. Some of the banks
running lengthwise through the field were made into small channels, the
ends of which were carried up to the bank of the nearest main irrigation
canal. No system of gates or sluices was employed, and when the farmer
wished to water one of his fields he simply broke away the bank opposite
one of his small channels and let the water flow into it. He would let
the water run along this small channel until it reached the part of
his land he wished to water. He then blocked the channel with a little
earth, at the same time breaking down its bank so that the water flowed
over one of the small squares and thoroughly soaked it. When this square
was finished he filled up the bank and repeated the process for the
next square, and so on until he had watered the necessary portion of
the field. When this was finished he returned to the main channel and
stopped the flow of the water by blocking up the hole he had made in the
dyke. The whole process was, and to-day still is, extremely simple,
but it needs care and vigilance, especially in the case of extensive
irrigation when water is being carried into several parts of an estate
at once. It will be obvious that any carelessness on the part of the
irrigator in not shutting off the water in time may lead to extensive
damage, not only to his own fields, but to those of his neighbours. In
the early Babylonian period, if a farmer left the water running in his
channel, and it flooded his neighbour’s field and hurt his crop, he had
to pay compensation according to the amount of damage done.

It was stated above that the irrigation-canals and little channels were
made above the level of the soil so that the water could at any point
be tapped and allowed to flow over the surrounding land; and in a flat
country like Babylonia it will be obvious that some means had to be
employed for raising the water from its natural level to the higher
level of the land. As we should expect, reference is made in the
Babylonian inscriptions to irrigation-machines, and, although their
exact form and construction are not described, they must have been very
similar to those employed at the present day. The modern inhabitants of
Mesopotamia employ four sorts of contrivances for raising the water into
their irrigation-channels; three of these are quite primitive, and are
those most commonly employed. The method which gives the least trouble
and which is used wherever the conditions allow is a primitive form of
water-wheel. This can be used only in a river with a good current.
The wheel is formed of rough boughs and branches nailed together, with
spokes joining the outer rims to a roughly hewn axle. A row of rough
earthenware cups or bottles are tied round the outer rim for picking
up the water, and a few rough paddles are fixed so that they stick out
beyond the rim. The wheel is then fixed in place near the bank of the
river, its axle resting in pillars of rough masonry.

[Illustration: 293.jpg A MODERN MACHINE FOR IRRIGATION ON THE
EUPHRATES.]

As the current turns the wheel, the bottles on the rim dip below the
surface and are raised up full. At the top of the wheel is fixed a
trough made by hollowing half the trunk of a date-palm, and into this
the bottles pour their water, which is conducted from the trough by
means of a small aqueduct into the irrigation-channel on the bank.

The convenience of the water-wheel will be obvious, for the water is
raised without the labour of man or beast, and a constant supply is
secured day and night so long as the current is strong enough to turn
the wheel. The water can be cut off by blocking the wheel or tying it
up. These wheels are most common on the Euphrates, and are usually set
up where there is a slight drop in the river bed and the water runs
swiftly over shallows. As the banks are very high, the wheels are
necessarily huge contrivances in order to reach the level of the fields,
and their very rough construction causes them to creak and groan as they
turn with the current. In a convenient place in the river several of
these are sometimes set up side by side, and the noise of their combined
creakings can be heard from a great distance. Some idea of what one of
these machines looks like can be obtained from the illustration. At Hit
on the Euphrates a line of gigantic water-wheels is built across the
river, and the noise they make is extraordinary.

Where there is no current to turn one of these wheels, or where the bank
is too high, the water must be raised by the labour of man or beast. The
commonest method, which is the one employed generally on the Tigris, is
to raise it in skins, which are drawn up by horses, donkeys, or cattle.
A recess with perpendicular sides is cut into the bank, and a wooden
spindle on wooden struts is supported horizontally over the recess. A
rope running over the spindle is fastened to the skin, while the funnel
end of the skin is held up by a second rope, running over a lower
spindle, until its mouth is opposite the trough into which the water
is to be poured. The beasts which are employed for raising the skin
are fastened to the ends of the ropes, and they get a good purchase for
their pull by being driven down a short cutting or inclined plane in the
bank. To get a constant flow of water, two skins are usually employed,
and as one is drawn up full the other is let down empty.

The third primitive method of raising water, which is commoner in Egypt
than in Mesopotamia at the present day, is the _shadduf_, and is worked
by hand. It consists of a beam supported in the centre, at one end of
which is tied a rope with a bucket or vessel for raising the water, and
at the other end is fixed a counterweight.* On an Assyrian bas-relief
found at Kuyunjik are representations of the shadduf in operation,
two of them being used, the one above the other, to raise the water to
successive levels. These were probably the contrivances usually employed
by the early Babylonians for raising the water to the level of their
fields, and the fact that they were light and easily removed must have
made them tempting objects to the dishonest farmer. Hammurabi therefore
fixed a scale of compensation to be paid to the owner by a detected
thief, which varied according to the class and value of the machine
he stole. The rivers and larger canals of Babylonia were used by the
ancient inhabitants not only for the irrigation of their fields, but
also as waterways for the transport of heavy materials. The recently
published letters of Hammurabi and Abêshu’ contain directions for the
transportation of corn, dates, sesame seed, and wood, which were ordered
to be brought in ships to Babylon, and the code of Hammurabi refers to
the transportation by water of wool and oil. It is therefore clear that
at this period considerable use was made of vessels of different size
for conveying supplies in bulk by water. The method by which the size of
such ships and barges was reckoned was based on the amount of grain
they were capable of carrying, and this was measured by the _gur_, the
largest measure of capacity. Thus mention is made in the inscriptions of
vessels of five, ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, and
seventy-five gur capacity. A boat-builder’s fee for building a vessel of
sixty gur was fixed at two shekels of silver, and it was proportionately
less for boats of smaller capacity. To ensure that the boat-builder
should not scamp his work, regulations were drawn up to fix on him the
responsibility for unsound work. Thus if a boat-builder were employed to
build a vessel, and he put faulty work into its construction so that it
developed defects within a year of its being launched, he was obliged to
strengthen and rebuild it at his own expense.

     * The fourth class of machine for raising water employed in
     Mesopotamia at the present day consists of an endless chain
     of iron buckets running over a wheel. This is geared by
     means of rough wooden cogs to a horizontal wheel, the
     spindle of which has long poles fixed to it, to which horses
     or cattle are harnessed. The beasts go round in a circle and
     so turn the machine. The contrivance is not so primitive as
     the three described above, and the iron buckets are of
     European importation.

The hire of a boatman was fixed at six gur of corn to be paid him
yearly, but it is clear that some of the larger vessels carried crews
commanded by a chief boatman, or captain, whose pay was probably on
a larger scale. If a man let his boat to a boatman, the latter was
responsible for losing or sinking it, and he had to replace it. A
boatman was also responsible for the safety of his vessel and of any
goods, such as corn, wool, oil, or dates, which he had been hired to
transport, and if they were sunk through his carelessness he had to make
good the loss. If he succeeded in refloating the boat after it had been
sunk, he was only under obligation to pay the owner half its value in
compensation for the damage it had sustained. In the case of a collision
between two vessels, if one was at anchor at the time, the owner of the
other vessel had to pay compensation for the boat that was sunk and its
cargo, the owner of the latter estimating on oath the value of what
had been sunk. Boats were also employed as ferries, and they must have
resembled the primitive form of ferry-boat in use at the present day,
which is heavily built of huge timbers, and employed for transporting
beasts as well as men across a river.

[Illustration: 297.jpg KAIKS, OR NATIVE BOATS ON THE EUPHRATES AT
BIREJIE.]

     Employed for ferrying caravans across the river.

There is evidence that under the Assyrians rafts floated on inflated
skins were employed for the transport of heavy goods, and these have
survived in the keleks of the present day. They are specially adapted
for the transportation of heavy materials, for they are carried down by
the current, and are kept in the course by means of huge sweeps or oars.
Being formed only of logs of wood and skins, they are not costly, for
wood is plentiful in the upper reaches of the rivers. At the end of
their journey, after the goods are landed, they are broken up. The wood
is sold at a profit, and the skins, after being deflated, are packed on
to donkeys to return by caravan.

[Illustration: 298.jpg THE MODERN BRIDGE OF BOATS ACROSS THE TIGRIS
OPPOSITE MOSUL.]

It is not improbable that such rafts were employed on the Tigris and the
Euphrates from the earliest periods of Chaldæan history, though boats
would have been used on the canals and more sluggish waterways.

In the preceding pages we have given a sketch of the more striking
aspects of early Babylonian life, on which light has been thrown by
recently discovered documents belonging to the period of the First
Dynasty of Babylon. We have seen that, in the code of laws drawn up
by Hammurabi, regulations were framed for settling disputes and fixing
responsibilities under almost every condition and circumstance which
might arise among the inhabitants of the country at that time; and the
question naturally arises as to how far the code of laws was in actual
operation.

[Illustration: 299.jpg A SMALL KELEK, OK RAFT, UPON THE TIGRIS AT
BAGHDAD.]

It is conceivable that the king may have held admirable convictions, but
have been possessed of little power to carry them out and to see
that his regulations were enforced. Luckily, we have not to depend on
conjecture for settling the question, for Hammurabi’s own letters which
are now preserved in the British Museum afford abundant evidence of the
active control which the king exercised over every department of his
administration and in every province of his empire. In the earlier
periods of history, when each city lived independently of its neighbours
and had its own system of government, the need for close and frequent
communication between them was not pressing, but this became apparent
as soon as they were welded together and formed parts of an extended
empire. Thus in the time of Sargon of Agade, about 3800 B.C., an
extensive system of royal convoys was established between the principal
cities. At Telloh the late M. de Sarzec came across numbers of lumps of
clay bearing the seal impressions of Sargon and of his son Narâm-Sin,
which had been used as seals and labels upon packages sent from Agade
to Shirpurla. In the time of Dungi, King of Ur, there was a constant
interchange of officials between the various cities of Babylonia and
Elam, and during the more recent diggings at Telloh there have been
found vouchers for the supply of food for their sustenance when stopping
at Shirpurla in the course of their journeys. In the case of Hammurabi
we have recovered some of the actual letters sent by the king himself to
Sin-idinnam, his local governor in the city of Larsam, and from them we
gain considerable insight into the principles which guided him in the
administration of his empire.

The letters themselves, in their general characteristics, resembled the
contract tablets of the period which have been already described. They
were written on small clay tablets oblong in shape, and as they were
only three or four inches long they could easily be carried about the
person of the messenger into whose charge they were delivered. After the
tablet was written it was enclosed in a thin envelope of clay, having
been first powdered with dry clay to prevent its sticking to the
envelope. The name of the person for whom the letter was intended was
written on the outside of the envelope, and both it and the tablet were
baked hard to ensure that they should not be broken on their travels.
The recipient of the letter, on its being delivered to him, broke the
outer envelope by tapping it sharply, and it then fell away in pieces,
leaving the letter and its message exposed. The envelopes were very
similar to those in which the contract tablets of the period were
enclosed, of which illustrations have already been given, their only
difference being that the text of the tablet was not repeated on the
envelope, as was the case with the former class of documents.

The royal letters that have been recovered throw little light on
military affairs and the prosecution of campaigns, for, being addressed
to governors of cities and civil officials, most of them deal with
matters affecting the internal administration of the empire. One letter
indeed contains directions concerning the movements of two hundred
and forty soldiers of “the King’s Company” who had been stationed in
Assyria, and another letter mentions certain troops who were quartered
in the city of Ur. A third deals with the supply of clothing and oil
for a section of the Babylonian army, and troops are also mentioned
as having formed the escort for certain goddesses captured from the
Elamites; while directions are sent to others engaged in a campaign upon
the Elamite frontier. The letter which contains directions for the
safe escort of the captured Elamite goddesses, and the one ordering the
return of these same goddesses to their own shrines, show that
foreign deities, even when captured from an enemy, were treated by the
Babylonians with the same respect and reverence that was shown by them
to their own gods and goddesses. Hammurabi gave directions in the first
letter for the conveyance of the goddesses to Babylon with all due pomp
and ceremony, sheep being supplied for sacrifice upon the journey,
and their usual rites being performed by their own temple-women and
priestesses. The king’s voluntary restoration of the goddesses to their
own country may have been due to the fact that, after their transference
to Babylon, the army of the Babylonians suffered defeat in Elam. This
misfortune would naturally have been ascribed by the king and the
priests to the anger of the Elamite goddesses at being detained in a
foreign land, and Hammurabi probably arrived at his decision that they
should be escorted back in the hope of once more securing victory for
the Babylonian arms.

The care which the king exercised for the due worship of his own gods
and the proper supply of their temples is well illustrated from the
letters that have been recovered, for he superintended the collection
of the temple revenues, and the herdsmen and shepherds attached to the
service of the gods sent their reports directly to him. He also took
care that the observances of religious rites and ceremonies were duly
carried out, and on one occasion he postponed the hearing of a lawsuit
concerning the title to certain property which was in dispute, as it
would have interfered with the proper observance of a festival in
the city of Ur. The plaintiff in the suit was the chief of the temple
bakers, and it was his duty to superintend the preparation of certain
offerings for the occasion. In order that he should not have to leave
his duties, the king put off the hearing of the case until after the
festival had been duly celebrated. The king also exercised a strict
control over the priests themselves, and received reports from the chief
priests concerning their own subordinates, and it is probable that the
royal sanction was obtained for all the principal appointments. The
guild of soothsayers was an important religious class at this time,
and they also were under the king’s direct control. A letter written by
Ammiditana, one of the later kings of the First Dynasty, to three high
officials of the city of Sippar, contains directions with regard to
certain duties to be carried out by the soothsayers attached to the
service of the city, and indicates the nature of their functions.
Ammiditana wrote to the officials in question, stating that there was a
scarcity of corn in the city of Shagga, and he therefore ordered them
to send a supply thither. But before the corn was brought into the city
they were told to consult the soothsayers, who were to divine the future
and ascertain whether the omens were favourable. If they proved to be
so, the corn was to be brought in. We may conjecture that the king took
this precaution, as he feared the scarcity of corn in Shagga was due
to the anger of some local deity or spirit, and that, if this were the
case, the bringing in of the corn would only lead to fresh troubles.
This danger it was the duty of the soothsayers to prevent.

Another class of the priesthood, which we may infer was under the king’s
direct control, was the astrologers, whose duty it probably was to make
reports to the king of the conjunctions of the heavenly bodies, with a
view to ascertaining whether they portended good or evil to the
state. No astrological reports written in this early period have
been recovered, but at a later period under the Assyrian empire the
astrologers reported regularly to the king on such matters, and it is
probable that the practice was one long established. One of Hammurabi’s
letters proves that the king regulated the calendar, and it is
legitimate to suppose that he sought the advice of his astrologers as
to the times when intercalary months were to be inserted. The letter
dealing with the calendar was written to inform Sin-idinnam, the
governor of Larsam, that an intercalary month was to be inserted. “Since
the year (i.e. the calendar) hath a deficiency,” he writes, “let the
month which is now beginning be registered as a second Elul,” and the
king adds that this insertion of an extra month will not justify any
postponement in the payment of the regular tribute due from the city of
Larsam, which had to be paid a month earlier than usual to make up for
the month that was inserted. The intercalation of additional months
was due to the fact that the Babylonian months were lunar, so that the
calendar had to be corrected at intervals to make it correspond to the
solar year.

From the description already given of the code of laws drawn up by
Hammurabi it will have been seen that the king attempted to incorporate
and arrange a set of regulations which should settle any dispute likely
to arise with regard to the duties and privileges of all classes of
his subjects. That this code was not a dead letter, but was actively
administered, is abundantly proved by many of the letters of Hammurabi
which have been recovered. From these we learn that the king took a very
active part in the administration of justice in the country, and that he
exercised a strict supervision, not only over the cases decided in the
capital, but also over those which were tried in the other great cities
and towns of Babylonia. Any private citizen was entitled to make a
direct appeal to the king for justice, if he thought he could not obtain
it in his local court, and it is clear from Hammurabi’s letters that he
always listened to such an appeal and gave it adequate consideration.
The king was anxious to stamp out all corruption on the part of those
who were invested with authority, and he had no mercy on any of his
officers who were convicted of taking bribes. On one occasion when he
had been informed of a case of bribery in the city of Dûr-gurgurri, he
at once ordered the governor of the district in which Dûr-gurgurri lay
to investigate the charge and send to Babylon those who were proved to
be guilty, that they might be punished. He also ordered that the bribe
should be confiscated and despatched to Babylon under seal, a wise
provision which must have tended to discourage those who were inclined
to tamper with the course of justice, while at the same time it enriched
the state. It is probable that the king tried all cases of appeal in
person when it was possible to do so. But if the litigants lived at
a considerable distance from Babylon, he gave directions to his local
officials on the spot to try the case. When he was convinced of
the justice of any claim, he would decide the case himself and send
instructions to the local authorities to see that his decision was duly
carried out. It is certain that many disputes arose at this period in
consequence of the extortions of money-lenders. These men frequently
laid claim in a fraudulent manner to fields and estates which they had
received in pledge as security for seed-corn advanced by them. In
cases where fraud was proved Hammurabi had no mercy, and summoned the
money-lender to Babylon to receive punishment, however wealthy and
powerful he might be.

A subject frequently referred to in Hammurabi’s letters is the
collection of revenues, and it is clear that an elaborate system was in
force throughout the country for the levying and payment of tribute
to the state by the principal cities of Babylonia, as well as for the
collection of rent and revenue from the royal estates and from the lands
which were set apart for the supply of the great temples. Collectors of
both secular and religious tribute sent reports directly to the king,
and if there was any deficit in the supply which was expected from a
collector he had to make it up himself; but the king was always ready
to listen to and investigate a complaint and to enforce the payment of
tribute or taxes so that the loss should not fall upon the collector.
Thus, in one of his letters Hammurabi informs the governor of
Larsam that a collector named Sheb-Sin had reported to him, saying
“Enubi-Marduk hath laid hands upon the money for the temple of
Bît-il-kittim (i.e. the great temple of the Sun-god at Larsam) which is
due from the city of Dûr-gurgurri and from the (region round about the)
Tigris, and he hath not rendered the full sum; and Gimil-Marduk hath
laid hands upon the money for the temple of Bît-il-kittim which is due
from the city.of Rakhabu and from the region round about that city, and
he hath not (paid) the full amount. But the palace hath exacted the full
sum from me.” It is probable that both Enubi-Marduk and Gimil-Marduk
were money-lenders, for we know from another letter that the former had
laid claim to certain property on which he had held a mortgage, although
the mortgage had been redeemed. In the present case they had probably
lent money or seed-corn to certain cultivators of land near Dûr-gurgurri
and Rakhabu and along the Tigris, and in settlement of their claims they
had seized the crops and had, moreover, refused to pay to the king’s
officer the proportion of the crops that was due to the state as
taxes upon the land. The governor of Larsam, the principal city in the
district, had rightly, as the representative of the palace (i.e.
the king), caused the tax-collector to make up the deficiency, but
Hammurabi, on receiving the subordinate officer’s complaint, referred
the matter back to the governor. The end of the letter is wanting, but
we may infer that Hammurabi condemned the defaulting money-lenders to
pay the taxes due, and fined them in addition, or ordered them to be
sent to the capital for punishment.

On another occasion Sheb-Sin himself and a second tax-collector named
Sin-mushtal appear to have been in fault and to have evaded coming to
Babylon when summoned thither by the king. It had been their duty to
collect large quantities of sesame seed as well as taxes paid in money.
When first summoned, they had made the excuse that it was the time of
harvest and they would come after the harvest was over. But as they
did not then make their appearance, Hammurabi wrote an urgent letter
insisting that they should be despatched with the full amount of the
taxes due, in the company of a trustworthy officer who would see that
they duly arrived at the capital.

Tribute on flocks and herds was also levied by the king, and collectors
or assessors of the revenue were stationed in each district, whose duty
it was to report any deficit in the revenue accounts. The owners of
flocks and herds were bound to bring the young cattle and lambs that
were due as tribute to the central city of the district in which they
dwelt, and they were then collected into large bodies and added to the
royal flocks and herds; but, if the owners attempted to hold back any
that were due as tribute, they were afterwards forced to incur the extra
expense and trouble of driving the beasts to Babylon. The flocks and
herds owned by the king and the great temples were probably enormous,
and yielded a considerable revenue in themselves apart from the tribute
and taxes due from private owners. Shepherds and herdsmen were placed in
charge of them, and they were divided into groups under chief shepherds,
who arranged the districts in which the herds and flocks were to be
grazed, distributing them when possible along the banks and in the
neighbourhood of rivers and canals which would afford good pasturage and
a plentiful supply of water. The king received reports from the chief
shepherds and herdsmen, and it was the duty of the governors of the
chief cities and districts of Babylonia to make tours of inspection
and see that due care was taken of the royal flocks and sheep. The
sheep-shearing for all the flocks that were pastured near the capital
took place in Babylon, and the king used to send out summonses to his
chief shepherds to inform them of the day when the shearing would take
place; and it is probable that the governors of the other great cities
sent out similar orders to the shepherds of flocks under their charge.
Royal and priestly flocks were often under the same chief officer, a
fact which shows the very strict control the king exercised over the
temple revenues.

The interests of the agricultural population were strictly looked
after by the king, who secured a proper supply of water for purposes of
irrigation by seeing that the canals and waterways were kept in a proper
state of repair and cleaned out at regular intervals. There is also
evidence that nearly every king of the First Dynasty of Babylon cut new
canals, and extended the system of irrigation and transportation which
had been handed down to him from his fathers. The draining of the
marshes and the proper repair of the canals could only be carried out
by careful and continuous supervision, and it was the duty of the local
governors to see that the inhabitants of villages and owners of land
situated on the banks of a canal should keep it in proper order. When
this duty had been neglected complaints were often sent to the king,
who gave orders to the local governor to remedy the defect. Thus on one
occasion it had been ordered that a canal at Erech which had silted
up should be deepened, but the dredging had not been carried out
thoroughly, so that the bed of the canal soon silted up again and boats
were prevented from entering the city. In these circumstances Hammurabi
gave pressing orders that the obstruction was to be removed and the
canal made navigable within three days.

Damage was often done to the banks of canals by floods which followed
the winter rains, and a letter of Abêshu’ gives an interesting account of
a sudden rise of the water in the Irnina canal so that it overflowed its
banks. The king was building a palace at the city of Kâr-Irnina, which
was supplied by the Irnina canal, and every year it was possible to put
so much work into the building. But one year, when little more than a
third of the year’s work was done, the building operations were stopped
by flood, the canal having overflowed its banks so that the water rose
right up to the wall of the town. In return for the duty of keeping
the canals in order, the villagers along the banks had the privilege of
fishing in its waters in the portion which was in their charge, and
any poaching by other villagers in this part of the stream was strictly
forbidden. On one occasion, in the reign of Samsu-iluna, Hammurabi’s son
and successor, the fishermen of the district of Rabim went down in their
boats to the district of Shakanim and caught fish there contrary to the
law. So the inhabitants of Shakanim complained of this poaching to the
king, who sent a palace official to the authorities of Sippar, near
which city the districts in question lay, with orders to inquire into
the matter and take steps to prevent all such poaching for the future.

The regulation of transportation on the canals was also under the royal
jurisdiction. The method of reckoning the size of ships has already
been described, and there is evidence that the king possessed numerous
vessels of all sizes for the carrying of grain, wool, and dates, as well
as for the wood and stone employed in his building operations. Each ship
seems to have had its own crew, under the command of a captain, and it
is probable that officials who regulated the transportation from the
centres where they were stationed were placed in charge of separate
sections of the rivers and of the canals.

It is obvious, from the account that has been given of the numerous
operations directly controlled and superintended by the king, that
he had need of a very large body of officials, by whose means he was
enabled to carry out successfully the administration of the country.
In the course of the account we have made mention of the judges and
judicial officers, the assessors and collectors of revenue, and the
officials of the palace who were under the king’s direct orders. It is
also obvious that different classes of officers were in charge of all
the departments of the administration. Two classes of officials,
who were placed in charge of the public works and looked after and
controlled the public slaves, and probably also had a good deal to do
with the collection of the revenue, had special privileges assigned
to them, and special legislation was drawn up to protect them in the
enjoyment of the same. As payment for their duties they were each
granted land with a house and garden, they were assigned the use of
certain sheep and cattle with which to stock their land, and in addition
they received a regular salary. They were in a sense personal retainers
of the king and were liable to be sent at any moment on a special
mission to carry out the king’s commands. Disobedience was severely
punished; for, if such an officer, when detailed for a special mission,
did not go but hired a substitute, he was liable to be put to death and
the substitute he had hired could take his office. Sometimes an officer
was sent for long periods some distance from his home to take charge
of a garrison, and when this was done his home duties were performed by
another man, who temporarily occupied his house and land, but gave it
back to the officer on his return. If such an officer had a son old
enough to perform his duty in his father’s absence, he was allowed to
do so and to till his father’s lands; but if the son was too young,
the substitute who took the officer’s place had to pay one-third of
the produce of the land to the child’s mother for his education. Before
departing on his journey to the garrison it was the officer’s duty to
arrange for the proper cultivation of his land and the discharge of his
local duties during his absence. If he omitted to do so and left
his land and duties neglected for more than a year, and another had
meanwhile taken his place, on his return he could not reclaim his land
and office. It will be obvious, therefore, that his position was a
specially favoured one and much sought after, and these regulations
ensured that the duties attaching to the office were not neglected.

In the course of his garrison duty or when on special service, these
officers ran some risk of being captured by the enemy, and in that event
regulations were drawn up for their ransom. If the captured officer was
wealthy and could pay for his own ransom, he was bound to do so, but
if he had not the necessary means his ransom was to be paid out of the
local temple treasury, and, when the funds in the temple treasury
did not suffice, he was to be ransomed by the state. It was specially
enacted that his land and garden and house were in no case to be sold
in order to pay for his ransom. These were inalienably attached to the
office which he held, and he was not allowed to sell them or the sheep
and cattle with which they were stocked. Moreover, he was not allowed
to bequeath any of this property to his wife or daughter, so that his
office would appear to have been hereditary and the property attached to
it to have been entailed on his son if he succeeded him. Such succession
would not, of course, have taken place if the officer by his own neglect
or disobedience had forfeited his office and its privileges during his
lifetime.

It has been suggested with considerable probability that these officials
were originally personal retainers and follows of Sumu-abu, the founder
of the First Dynasty of Babylon. They were probably assigned lands
throughout the country in return for their services to the king, and
their special duties were to preserve order and uphold the authority of
their master. In the course of time their duties were no doubt modified,
but they retained their privileges and they must have continued to be a
very valuable body of officers, on whose personal loyalty the king could
always rely. In the preceding chapter we have already seen how grants of
considerable estates were made by the Kassite kings of the Third Dynasty
to followers who had rendered conspicuous services, and at the same time
they received the privilege of holding such lands free of all liability
to forced labour and the payment of tithes and taxes. We may conclude
that the class of royal officers under the kings of the First Dynasty
had a similar origin.

In the present chapter, from information recently made available, we
have given some account of the system of administration adopted by the
early kings of Babylon, and we have described in some detail the
various classes of the Babylonian population, their occupations, and the
conditions under which they lived. In the two preceding chapters we have
dealt with the political history of Western Asia from the very earliest
period of the Sumerian city-states down to the time of the Kassite
kings. In the course of this account we have seen how Mesopotamia in the
dawn of history was in the sole possession of the Sumerian race and how
afterwards it fell in turn under the dominion of the Semites and the
kings of Elam. The immigration of fresh Semitic tribes at the end of the
third millennium before Christ resulted in the establishment in Babylon
of the Semitic kings who are known as First Dynasty kings; and under the
sway of Hammurabi, the greatest of this group of kings, the empire thus
established in Western Asia had every appearance of permanence. Although
Elam no longer troubled Babylon, a great danger arose from a new and
unexpected quarter. In the Country of the Sea--which comprised the
districts in the extreme south of Babylonia on the shores of the Persian
Gulf--the Sumerians had rallied their forces, and they now declared
themselves independent of Babylonian control. A period of conflict
followed between the kings of the First Dynasty and the kings of the
Country of the Sea, in which the latter more than held their own; and,
when the Hittite tribes of Syria invaded Northern Babylonia in the reign
of Samsu-ditana, Babylon’s power of resistance was so far weakened that
she fell an easy prey to the rulers of the Country of the Sea. But the
reappearance of the Sumerians in the rôle of leading race in Western
Asia was destined not to last long, and was little more than the last
flicker of vitality exhibited by this ancient and exhausted race. Thus
the Second Dynasty fell in its turn before the onslaught of the Kassite
tribes who descended from the mountainous districts in the west of Elam,
and, having overrun the whole of Mesopotamia, established a new dynasty
at Babylon, and adopted Babylonian civilization.

With the advent of the Kassite kings a new chapter opens in the history
of Western Asia. Up to that time Egypt and Babylon, the two chief
centres of ancient civilization, had no doubt indirectly influenced one
another, but they had not come into actual contact. During the period of
the Kassite kings both Babylon and Assyria established direct relations
with Egypt, and from that time forward the influence they exerted upon
one another was continuous and unbroken. We have already traced the
history of Babylon up to this point in the light of recent discoveries,
and a similar task awaits us with regard to Assyria. Before we enter
into a discussion of Assyria’s origin and early history in the light of
recent excavation and research, it is necessary that we should return
once more to Egypt, and describe the course of her history from the
period when Thebes succeeded in displacing Memphis as the capital city.




CHAPTER VII

TEMPLES AND TOMBS OF THEBES

We have seen that it was in the Theban period that Egypt emerged from
her isolation, and for the first time came into contact with Western
Asia. This grand turning-point in Egyptian history seemed to be the
appropriate place at which to pause in the description of our latest
knowledge of Egyptian history, in order to make known the results of
archaeological discovery in Mesopotamia and Western Asia generally. The
description has been carried down past the point of convergence of the
two originally isolated paths of Egyptian and Babylonian civilization,
and what new information the latest discoveries have communicated to us
on this subject has been told in the preceding chapters. We now have to
retrace our steps to the point where we left Egyptian history and resume
the thread of our Egyptian narrative.

The Hyksos conquest and the rise of Thebes are practically
contemporaneous. The conquest took place perhaps three or four hundred
years after the first advancement of Thebes to the position of capital
of Egypt, but it must be remembered that this position was not retained
during the time of the XIIth Dynasty. The kings of that dynasty, though
they were Thebans, did not reign at Thebes. Their royal city was in the
North, in the neighbourhood of Lisht and Mêdûm, where their pyramids
were erected, and their chief care was for the lake province of the
Fayyûm, which was largely the creation of Amenemhat III, the Moeris
of the Greeks. It was not till Thebes became the focus of the
national resistance to the Hyksos that its period of greatness began.
Henceforward it was the undisputed capital of Egypt, enlarged and
embellished by the care and munificence of a hundred kings, enriched by
the tribute of a hundred conquered nations.

But were we to confine ourselves to the consideration only of the latest
discoveries of Theban greatness after the expulsion of the Hyksos, we
should be omitting much that is of interest and importance. For the
Egyptians the first grand climacteric in their history (after the
foundation of the monarchy) was the transference of the royal power from
Memphis and Herakleopolis to a Theban house. The second, which followed
soon after, was the Hyksos invasion. The two are closely connected in
Theban history; it is Thebes that defeated Herakleopolis and conquered
Memphis; it is Theban power that was overthrown by the Hyksos; it is
Thebes that expelled them and initiated the second great period of
Egyptian history. We therefore resume our narrative at a point before
the great increase of Theban power at the time of the expulsion of the
Hyksos, and will trace this power from its rise, which followed
the defeat of Herakleopolis and Memphis. It is upon this epoch--the
beginning of Theban power--that the latest discoveries at Thebes have
thrown some new light.

More than anywhere else in Egypt excavations have been carried on at
Thebes, on the site of the ancient capital of the country. And here, if
anywhere, it might have been supposed that there was nothing more to be
found, no new thing to be exhumed from the soil, no new fact to be added
to our knowledge of Egyptian history. Yet here, no less than at Abydos,
has the archaeological exploration of the last few years been especially
successful, and we have seen that the ancient city of Thebes has a great
deal more to tell us than we had expected.

The most ancient remains at Thebes were discovered by Mr. Newberry in
the shape of two tombs of the VIth Dynasty, cut upon the face of the
well-known hill of Shêkh Abd el-Kûrna, on the west bank of the Nile
opposite Luxor. Every winter traveller to Egypt knows, well the ride
from the sandy shore opposite the Luxor temple, along the narrow pathway
between the gardens and the canal, across the bridges and over the
cultivated land to the Ramesseum, behind which rises Shêkh Abd el-Kûrna,
with its countless tombs, ranged in serried rows along the scarred and
scarped face of the hill. This hill, which is geologically a fragment of
the plateau behind which some gigantic landslip was sent sliding in the
direction of the river, leaving the picturesque gorge and cliffs of Dêr
el-Bahari to mark the place from which it was riven, was evidently the
seat of the oldest Theban necropolis. Here were the tombs of the Theban
chiefs in the period of the Old Kingdom, two of which have been found
by Mr. Newberry. In later times, it would seem, these tombs were largely
occupied and remodelled by the great nobles of the XVIIIth Dynasty, so
that now nearly all the tombs extant on Shêkh Abd el-Kûrna belong to
that dynasty.

Of the Thebes of the IXth and Xth Dynasties, when the Herakleopolites
ruled, we have in the British Museum two very remarkable statues--one of
which is here illustrated--of the steward of the palace, Mera. The tomb
from which they came is not known. Both are very beautiful examples
of the Egyptian sculptor’s art, and are executed in a style eminently
characteristic of the transition period between the work of the Old and
Middle Kingdoms. As specimens of the art of the Hierakonpolite period,
of which we have hardly any examples, they are of the greatest interest.
Mera is represented wearing a different head-dress in each figure; in
one he has a short wig, in the other a skullcap.

[Illustration: 320.jpg STATUE OF MERA]

When the Herakleopolite dominion was finally overthrown, in spite of the
valiant resistance of the princes of Asyût, and the Thebans assumed the
Pharaonic dignity, thus founding the XIth Dynasty, the Theban necropolis
was situated in the great bay in the cliffs, immediately north of Shêkh
Abd el-Kûrna, which is known as Dêr el-Bahari. In this picturesque part
of Western Thebes, in many respects perhaps the most picturesque
place in Egypt, the greatest king of the XIth Dynasty, Neb-hapet-Râ
Mentuhetep, excavated his tomb and built for the worship of his ghost
a funerary temple, which he called _Akh-aset_, “Glorious-is-its-
Situation,” a name fully justified by its surroundings. This temple is
an entirely new discovery, made by Prof. Naville and Mr. Hall in 1903.
The results obtained up to date have been of very great importance,
especially with regard to the history of Egyptian art and architecture,
for our sources of information were few and we were previously not very
well informed as to the condition of art in the time of the XIth
Dynasty.

The new temple lies immediately to the south of the great XVIIIth
Dynasty temple at Dêr el-Bahari, which has always been known, and which
was excavated first by Mariette and later by Prof. Naville, for the
Egypt Exploration Fund. To the results of the later excavations we shall
return. When they were finally completed, in the year 1898, the great
XVIIIth Dynasty temple, which was built by Queen Hatshepsu, had been
entirely cleared of débris, and the colonnades had been partially
restored (under the care of Mr. Somers Clarke) in order to make a roof
under which to protect the sculptures on the walls. The whole mass of
débris, consisting largely of fallen _talus_ from the cliffs above,
which had almost hidden the temple, was removed; but a large tract lying
to the south of the temple, which was also covered with similar mounds
of débris, was not touched, but remained to await further investigation.
It was here, beneath these heaps of débris, that the new temple was
found when work was resumed by the Egypt Exploration Fund in 1903. The
actual tomb of the king has not yet been revealed, although that of
Neb-hetep Mentuhetep, who may have been his immediate predecessor,
was discovered by Mr. Carter in 1899. It was known, however, and still
uninjured in the reign of Ramses IX of the XXth Dynasty. Then, as we
learn from the report of the inspectors sent to examine the royal tombs,
which is preserved in the Abbott Papyrus, they found the _pyramid-tomb_
of King Xeb-hapet-Râ which is in Tjesret (the ancient Egyptian name for
Dêr el-Bahari); it was intact. We know, therefore, that it was intact
about 1000 B.C. The description of it as a pyramid-tomb is interesting,
for in the inscription of Tetu, the priest of Akh-aset, who was buried
at Abydos, Akh-aset is said to have been a pyramid. That the newly
discovered temple was called Akh-aset we know from several inscriptions
found in it. And the most remarkable thing about this temple is that in
its centre there was a pyramid. This must be the pyramid-tomb which was
found intact by the inspectors, so that the tomb itself must be close
by. But it does not seem to have been beneath the pyramid, below which
is only solid rock. It is perhaps a gallery cut in the cliffs at the
back of the temple.

The pyramid was then a dummy, made of rubble within a revetment of heavy
flint nodules, which was faced with fine limestone. It was erected on a
pyloni-form base with heavy cornice of the usual Egyptian pattern. This
central pyramid was surrounded by a roofed hall or ambulatory of small
octagonal pillars, the outside wall of which was decorated with coloured
reliefs, depicting various scenes connected with the _sed-heb_ or
jubilee-festival of the king, processions of the warriors and magnates
of the realm, scenes of husbandry, boat-building, and so forth, all of
which were considered appropriate to the chapel of a royal tomb at that
period. Outside this wall was an open colonnade of square pillars.
The whole of this was built upon an artificially squared rectangular
platform of natural rock, about fifteen feet high. To north and south of
this were open courts. The southern is bounded by the hill; the northern
is now bounded by the Great Temple of Hat-shepsu, but, before this was
built, there was evidently a very large open court here. The face of the
rock platform is masked by a wall of large rectangular blocks of fine
white limestone, some of which measure six feet by three feet six
inches. They are beautifully squared and laid in bonded courses of
alternate sizes, and the walls generally may be said to be among the
finest yet found in Egypt. We have already remarked that the architects
of the Middle Kingdom appear to have been specially fond of fine masonry
in white stone. The contrast between these splendid XIth Dynasty walls,
with their great base-stones of sandstone, and the bad rough masonry of
the XVIIIth Dynasty temple close by, is striking. The XVIIIth Dynasty
architects and masons had degenerated considerably from the standard of
the Middle Kingdom.

This rock platform was approached from the east in the centre by an
inclined plane or ramp, of which part of the original pavement of wooden
beams remains _in situ_.

[Illustration: 324.jpg XIth DYNASTY WALL: DÊR EL-BAHARI.]

     Excavated by Mr. Hall, 1904, for the Egypt Exploration Fund.

To right and left of this ramp are colonnades, each of twenty-two square
pillars, all inscribed with the name and titles of Mentuhetep. The walls
masking the platform in these colonnades were sculptured with various
scenes, chiefly representing boat processions and campaigns against the
Aamu or nomads of the Sinaitic peninsula. The design of the colonnades
is the same as that of the Great Temple, and the whole plan of this
part, with its platform approached by a ramp flanked by colonnades,
is so like that of the Great Temple that we cannot but assume that the
peculiar design of the latter, with its tiers of platforms approached by
ramps flanked by colonnades, is not an original idea, but was directly
copied by the XVIIIth Dynasty architects from the older XIth Dynasty
temple which they found at Dêr el-Bahari when they began their work.

[Illustration: 325.jpg XVIIIth DYNASTY WALL, DBR EL-BAHARI.]

     Excavated by M. Naville, 1896; repaired by Mr. Howard
     Carter, 1904.

The supposed originality of Hatshepsu’s temple is then non-existent;
it was a copy of the older design, in fact, a magnificent piece of
archaism. But Hatshepsu’s architects copied this feature only; the
actual arrangements _on_ the platforms in the two temples are as
different as they can possibly be. In the older we have a central
pyramid with a colonnade round it, in the newer may be found an open
court in front of rock-cave shrines.

[Illustration: 326.jpg EXCAVATION OF THE NORTH LOWER COLONNADE OF THE
XIth DYNASTY TEMPLE, DER EL-BAHARI, 1904.]

Before the XIth Dynasty temple was set up a series of statues of King
Mentuhetep and of a later king, Amenhetep I, in the form of Osiris, like
those of Usertsen (Senusret) I at Lisht already mentioned. One of these
statues is in the British Museum. In the south court were discovered
six statues of King Usertsen (Senusret) III, depicting him at different
periods of his life. Pour of the heads are preserved, and, as the
expression of each differs from that of the other, it is quite evident
that some show him as a young, others as an old, man.

[Illustration: 327.jpg GRANITE THRESHOLD AND OCTAGONAL SANDSTONE
PILLARS]

     Of The XIth Dynasty Temple At Dee El-Bahari. About 2500 B.C.

The face is of the well-known hard and lined type which is seen also in
the portraits of Amenemhat III, and was formerly considered to be that
of the Hyksos. Messrs. Newberry and Garstang, as we have seen, consider
it to be so, indirectly, as they regard the type as having been
introduced into the XIIth Dynasty by Queen Nefret, the mother of
Usertsen (Sen-usret) III. This queen, they think, _was_ a Hittite
princess, and the Hittites were practically the same thing as the
Hyksos. We have seen, however, that there is very little foundation for
this view, and it is more than probable that this peculiar physiognomy
is of a type purely Egyptian in character.

[Illustration: 328.jpg EXCAVATION OF THE TOMB OF A PRIESTESS,]

     On The Platform Of The XIth Dynasty Temple, Der El-Bahari,
     1904.

On the platform, around the central pyramid, were buried in small
chamber-tombs a number of priestesses of the goddess Hathor, the
mistress of the desert and special deity of Dêr el-Bahari. They were
all members of the king’s harîm, and they bore the title of “King’s
Favourite.” As told in a previous chapter, all were buried at one
time, before the final completion of the temple, and it is by no means
impossible that they were strangled at the king’s death and buried round
him in order that their ghosts might accompany him in the next world,
just as the slaves were buried around the graves (or secondary graves)
of the 1st Dynasty kings at Aby-dos. They themselves, as also already
related, took with them to the next world little waxen figures which
when called upon could by magic be turned into ghostly slaves. These
images were _ushabtiu,_ “answerers,” the predecessors of the little
figures of wood, stone, and pottery which are found buried with the
dead in later times. The priestesses themselves were, so to speak, human
_ushabtiu,_ for royal use only, and accompanied the kings to their final
resting-place.

With the priestesses was buried the usual funerary furniture
characteristic of the period. This consisted of little models of
granaries with the peasants bringing in the corn, models of bakers and
brewers at work, boats with their crews, etc., just as we find them
in the XIth and XIIth Dynasty tombs at el-Bersha and Beni Hasan. These
models, too, were supposed to be transformed by magic into actual
workmen who would work for the deceased, heap up grain for her, brew
beer for her, ferry her over the ghostly Nile into the tomb-world, or
perform any other services required.

Some of the stone sarcophagi of the priestesses are very elaborately
decorated with carved and painted reliefs depicting each deceased
receiving offerings from priests, one of whom milks the holy cows of
Hathor to give her milk. The sarcophagi were let down into the tomb in
pieces and there joined together, and they have been removed in the same
way. The finest is a unique example of XIth Dynasty art, and it is now
preserved in the Museum of Cairo.

[Illustration: 330.jpg CASES OF ANTIQUITIES LEAVING DÊR EL-BAHARI FOR
TRANSPORT TO CAIRO.]

In memory of the priestesses there were erected on the platform behind
the pyramid a number of small shrines, which were decorated with the
most delicately coloured carvings in high relief, representing chiefly
the same subjects as those on the sarcophagi. The peculiar style of
these reliefs was previously unknown. In connection with them a most
interesting possibility presents itself.

[Illustration: 331.jpg SHIPPING CASES OF ANTIQUITIES ON BOARD THE NILE
STEAMER AT LUXOR, FOR THE EGYPT EXPLORATION FUND.]

We know the name of the chief artist of Mentuhetep’s reign. He was
called Mertisen, and he thus describes himself on his tombstone from
Abydos, now in the Louvre: “I was an artist skilled in my art. I knew
my art, how to represent the forms of going forth and returning, so that
each limb may be in its proper place. I knew how the figure of a man
should walk and the carriage of a woman, the poising of the arm to
bring the hippopotamus low, the going of the runner. I knew how to make
amulets, which enable us to go without fire burning us and without the
flood washing us away. No man could do this but I, and the eldest son
of my body. Him has the god decreed to excel in art, and I have seen
the perfections of the work of his hands in every kind of rare stone,
in gold and silver, in ivory and ebony.” Now since Mertisen and his son
were the chief artists of their day, it is more than probable that they
were employed to decorate their king’s funerary chapel. So that in all
probability the XIth Dynasty reliefs from Dêr el-Bahari are the work
of Mertisen and his son, and in them we see the actual “forms of going
forth and returning, the poising of the arm to bring the hippopotamus
low, the going of the runner,” to which he refers on his tombstone. This
adds a note of personal interest to the reliefs, an interest which is
often sadly wanting in Egypt, where we rarely know the names of the
great artists whose works we admire so much. We have recovered the names
of the sculptor and painter of Seti I’s temple at Abydos and that of the
sculptor of some of the tombs at Tell el-Amarna, but otherwise very few
names of the artists are directly associated with the temples and tombs
which they decorated, and of the architects we know little more. The
great temple of Dêr el-Bahari was, however, we know, designed by Senmut,
the chief architect to Queen Hatshepsu.

It is noticeable that Mertisen’s art, if it is Mertisen’s, is of a
peculiar character. It is not quite so fully developed as that of the
succeeding XIIth Dynasty. The drawing of the figures is often peculiar,
strange lanky forms taking the place of the perfect proportions of the
IVth-VIth and the XIIth Dynasty styles. Great elaboration is bestowed
upon decoration, which is again of a type rather archaic in character
when compared with that of the XIIth Dynasty. We are often reminded of
the rude sculptures which used to be regarded as typical of the art of
the XIth Dynasty, while at the same time we find work which could not
be surpassed by the best XIIth Dynasty masters. In fact, the art of
Neb-hapet-Râ’s reign was the art of a transitional period. Under the
decadent Memphites of the VIIth and VIIIth Dynasties, Egyptian art
rapidly fell from the high estate which it had attained under the Vth
Dynasty, and, though good work was done under the Hierakonpolites, the
chief characteristic of Egyptian art at the time of the Xth and early
XIth Dynasties is its curious roughness and almost barbaric appearance.
When, however, the kings of the XIth Dynasty reunited the whole land
under one sceptre, and the long reign of Neb-hapet-Râ Mentuhetep enabled
the reconsolidation of the realm to be carried out by one hand, art
began to revive, and, just as to Neb-hapet-Râ must be attributed the
renascence of the Egyptian state under the hegemony of Thebes, so must
the revival of art in his reign be attributed to his great artists,
Mertisen and his son. They carried out in the realm of art what their
king had carried out in the political realm, and to them must be
attributed the origin of the art of the Middle Kingdom which under the
XIIth Dynasty attained so high a pitch of excellence. The sculptures
of the king’s temple at Dêr el-Bahari, then, are monuments of the
renascence of Egyptian art, after the state of decadence into which it
had fallen during the long civil wars between South and North; it is
a reviving art, struggling out of barbarism to regain perfection, and
therefore has much about it that seems archaic, stiff, and curious when
compared with later work. To the XVIIIth Dynasty Egyptian it would no
doubt have seemed hopelessly old-fashioned and even semi-barbarous, and
he had no qualms about sweeping it aside whenever it appeared in the
way of the work of his own time; but to us this very strangeness
gives additional charm and interest, and we can only be thankful that
Mertisen’s work has lasted (in fragments only, it is true) to our own
day, to tell us the story of a little known chapter in the history of
ancient Egyptian art.

From this description it will have been seen that the temple is an
important monument of the Egyptian art and architecture of the Middle
Kingdom. It is the only temple of that period of which considerable
traces have been found, and on that account the study of it will be of
the greatest interest. It is the best preserved of the older temples of
Egypt, and at Thebes it is by far the most ancient building recovered.
Historically it has given us a new king of the XIth Dynasty,
Sekhâhe-tep-Râ Mentuhetep, and the name of the queen of Neb-hapet-Râ
Mentuhetep, Aasheit, who seems to have been an Ethiopian, to judge from
her portrait, which has been discovered. It is interesting to note that
one of the priestesses was a negress.

The name Neb-hapet-Râ may be unfamiliar to those readers who are
acquainted with the lists of the Egyptian kings. It is a correction
of the former reading, “Neb-kheru-Râ,” which is now known from these
excavations to be erroneous. Neb-hapet-Râ (or, as he used to be called,
Neb-kheru-Râ) is Mentuhetep III of Prof. Petrie’s arrangement. Before
him there seem to have come the kings Mentuhetep Neb-hetep (who is also
commemorated in this temple) and Neb-taui-Râ; after him, Sekhâhetep-Râ
Mentuhetep IV and Seânkhkarâ Mentuhetep V, who were followed by an
Antef, bearing the banner or hawk-name Uah-ânkh. This king was followed
by Amenemhat I, the first king of the XIIth Dynasty. Antef Uah-ânkh may
be numbered Antef I, as the prince Antefa, who founded the XIth Dynasty,
did not assume the title of king.

Other kings of the name of Antef also ruled over Egypt, and they used to
be regarded as belonging to the XIth Dynasty; but Prof. Steindorff
has now proved that they really reigned after the XIIIth Dynasty, and
immediately before the Sekenenrâs, who were the fighters of the Hyksos
and predecessors of the XVIIIth Dynasty. The second names of Antef III
(Seshes-Râ-up-maat) and Antef IV (Seshes-Râ-her-her-maat) are exactly
similar to those of the XIIIth Dynasty kings and quite unlike those of
the Mentuheteps; also at Koptos a decree of Antef II (Nub-kheper-Râ) has
been found inscribed on a doorway of Usertsen (Senusret) I; so that
he cannot have preceded him. Prof. Petrie does not yet accept these
conclusions, and classes all the Antefs together with the Mentuheteps in
the XIth Dynasty. He considers that he has evidence from Herakleopolis
that Antef Xub-kheper-Râ (whom he numbers Antef V) preceded the XIIth
Dynasty, and he supposes that the decree of Nub-kheper-Râ at Koptos is
a later copy of the original and was inscribed during the XIIth Dynasty.
But this is a difficult saying. The probabilities are that Prof.
Steindorff is right. Antef Uah-ânkh must, however, have preceded the
XIIth Dynasty, since an official of that period refers to his father’s
father as having lived in Uah-ânkh ‘s time.

The necropolis of Dêr el-Bahari was no doubt used all through the period
of the XIth and XIIth Dynasties, and many tombs of that period have been
found there. A large number of these were obliterated by the building
of the great temple of Queen Hatshepsu, in the northern part of the
cliff-bay. We know of one queen’s tomb of that period which runs right
underneath this temple from the north, and there is another that is
entered at the south side which also runs down underneath it. Several
tombs were likewise found in the court between it and the XIth Dynasty
temple. We know that the XVIIIth Dynasty temple was largely built over
this court, and we can see now the XIth Dynasty mask-wall on the west of
the court running northwards underneath the mass of the XVIIIth Dynasty
temple. In all probability, then, when the temple of Hatshepsu
was built, the larger portion of the Middle Kingdom necropolis (of
chamber-tombs reached by pits), which had filled up the bay to the north
of the Mentuhetep temple, was covered up and obliterated, just as
the older VIth Dynasty gallery tombs of Shêkh Abd el-Kûrna had been
appropriated and altered at the same period.

The kings of the XIIth and XIIIth Dynasties were not buried at Thebes,
as we have seen, but in the North, at Dashûr, Lisht, and near the
Fayymn, with which their royal city at Itht-taui had brought them into
contact. But at the end of the XIIIth Dynasty the great invasion of the
Hyksos probably occurred, and all Northern Egypt fell under the Arab
sway. The native kings were driven south from the Fayymn to Abydos,
Koptos, and Thebes, and at Thebes they were buried, in a new necropolis
to the north of Dêr el-Bahari (probably then full), on the flank of a
long spur of hill which is now called Dra’ Abu-’l-Negga, “Abu-’l-Negga’s
Arm.” Here the Theban kings of the period between the XIIIth and XVIIth
Dynasties, Upuantemsaf, Antef Nub-kheper-Râ, and his descendants, Antefs
III and IV, were buried. In their time the pressure of foreign invasion
seems to have been felt, for, to judge from their coffins, which show
progressive degeneration of style and workmanship, poverty now afflicted
Upper Egypt and art had fallen sadly from the high standard which it had
reached in the days of the XIth and XIIth Dynasties. Probably the later
Antefs and Sebekemsafs were vassals of the Hyksos. Their descendants
of the XVIIth Dynasty were buried in the same necropolis of Dra’
Abu-’l-Negga, and so were the first two kings of the XVIIIth Dynasty,
Aahmes and Amenhetep I. The tombs of the last two have not yet been
found, but we know from the Abbott Papyrus that Amenhetep’s was
here, for, like that of Menttihetep III, it was found intact by the
inspectors. It was a gallery-tomb of very great length, and will be a
most interesting find when it is discovered, as it no doubt eventually
will be. Aahmes had a tomb at Abydos, which was discovered by Mr.
Currelly, working for the Egypt Exploration Fund. This, however, like
the Abydene tomb of Usert-sen (Senusret) III, was in all likelihood a
sham or secondary tomb, the king having most probably been buried at
Thebes, in the Dra’ Abu-’l-Negga. The Abydos tomb is of interesting
construction. The entrance is by a simple pit, from which a gallery
runs round in a curving direction to a great hall supported by eighteen
square pillars, beyond which is a further gallery which was never
finished. Nothing was found in the tomb. On the slope of the mountain,
due west of and in a line with the tomb, Mr. Currelly found a
terrace-temple analogous to those of Dêr el-Bahari, approached not
by means of a ramp but by stairways at the side. It was evidently the
funerary temple of the tomb.

[Illustration: 338.jpg Statue of Queen Teta-shera]

     Grandmother of Aahmes, the conqueror of the Hyksos and
     founder of the XVIIIth Dynasty. About 1700 B. C. British
     Museum. From the photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

The secondary tomb of Usertsen (Senusret) III at Abydos, which has
already been mentioned, was discovered in the preceding year by Mr. A.
E. P. Weigall, and excavated by Mr. Currelly in 1903. It lies north of
the Aahmes temple, between it and the main cemetery of Abydos. It is a
great _bâb_ or gallery-tomb, like those of the later kings at Thebes,
with the usual apparatus of granite plugs, barriers, pits, etc., to
defy plunderers. The tomb had been plundered, nevertheless, though it is
probable that the robbers were vastly disappointed with what they
found in it. Mr. Currelly ascribes the absence of all remains to the
plunderers, but the fact is that there probably never was anything in
it but an empty sarcophagus. Near the tomb Mr. Weigall discovered
some dummy mastabas, a find of great interest. Just as the king had a
secondary tomb, so secondary mastabas, mere dummies of rubble like the
XIth Dynasty pyramid at Dêr el-Bahari, were erected beside it to look
like the tombs of his courtiers. Some curious sinuous brick walls which
appear to act as dividing lines form a remarkable feature of this sham
cemetery. In a line with the tomb, on the edge of the cultivation,
is the funerary temple belonging to it, which was found by Mr.
Randall-Maclver in 1900. Nothing remains but the bases of the fluted
limestone columns and some brick walls. A headless statue of Usertsen
was found.

We have an interesting example of the custom of building a secondary
tomb for royalties in these two nécropoles of Dra’ Abu-’l-Negga and
Abydos. Queen Teta-shera, the grandmother of Aahmes, a beautiful
statuette of whom may be seen in the British Museum, had a small pyramid
at Abydos, eastward of and in a line with the temple and secondary tomb
of Aahmes. In 1901 Mr. Mace attempted to find the chamber, but could
not. In the next year Mr. Currelly found between it and the Aahmes
tomb a small chapel, containing a splendid stele, on which Aahmes
commemorates his grandmother, who, he says, was buried at Thebes and had
a _mer-âhât_ at Abydos, and he records his determination to build her
also a pyramid at Abydos, out of his love and veneration for her memory.
It thus appeared that the pyramid to the east was simply a dummy,
like Usertsen’s mastabas, or the Mentuhetep pyramid at Dêr el-Bahari.
Teta-shera was actually buried at Dra’ Abu-’l-Negga. Her secondary
pyramid, like that of Aahmes himself, was in the “holy ground” at
Abydos, though it was not an imitation _bâb_, but a dummy pyramid of
rubble. This well illustrates the whole custom of the royal primary and
secondary tombs, which, as we have seen, had obtained in the case of
royal personages from the time of the 1st Dynasty, when Aha had two
tombs, one at Nakâda and the other at Abydos. It is probable that all
the 1st Dynasty tombs at Abydos are secondary, the kings being really
buried elsewhere. After their time we know for certain that Tjeser and
Snefru had duplicate tombs, possibly also Unas, and certainly Usertsen
(Senusret) III, Amenemhat III, and Aahmes; while Mentuhetep III and
Queen Teta-shera had dummy pyramids as well as their tombs. Ramses III
also had two tombs, both at Thebes. The reasons for this custom were
two: first, the desire to elude plunderers, and second, the wish to give
the ghost a _pied-à-terre_ on the sacred soil of Abydos or Sakkâra.

As the inscription of Aahmes which records the building of the dummy
pyramid of Teta-shera is of considerable interest, it may here be
translated. The text reads: “It came to pass that when his Majesty the
king, even the king of South and North, Neb-pehti-Râ, Son of the Sun,
Aahmes, Giver of Life, was taking his pleasure in the _tjadu_-hall,
the hereditary princess greatly favoured and greatly prized, the king’s
daughter, the king’s sister, the god’s wife and great wife of the king,
Nefret-ari-Aahmes, the living, was in the presence of his Majesty. And
the one spake unto the other, seeking to do honour to These There,*
which consisteth in the pouring of water, the offering upon the altar,
the painting of the stele at the beginning of each season, at the
Festival of the New Moon, at the feast of the month, the feast of the
going-forth of the _Sem_-priest, the Ceremonies of the Night, the Feasts
of the Fifth Day of the Month and of the Sixth, the _Hak_-festival, the
_Uag_-festival, the feast of Thoth, the beginning of every season of
heaven and earth. And his sister spake, answering him: ‘Why hath one
remembered these matters, and wherefore hath this word been said?
Prithee, what hath come into thy heart?’ The king spake, saying: ‘As for
me, I have remembered the mother of my mother, the mother of my father,
the king’s great wife and king’s mother Teta-shera, deceased, whose
tomb-chamber and _mer-ahât_ are at this moment upon the soil of Thebes
and Abydos. I have spoken thus unto thee because my Majesty desireth to
cause a pyramid and chapel to be made for her in the Sacred Land, as a
gift of a monument from my Majesty, and that its lake should be dug, its
trees planted, and its offerings prescribed; that it should be provided
with slaves, furnished with lands, and endowed with cattle, with
_hen-ka_ priests and _kher-heb_ priests performing their duties, each
man knowing what he hath to do.’ Behold! when his Majesty had thus
spoken, these things were immediately carried out. His Majesty did these
things on account of the greatness of the love which he bore her, which
was greater than anything. Never had ancestral kings done the like for
their mothers. Behold! his Majesty extended his arm and bent his hand,
and made for her the king’s offering to Geb, to the Ennead of Gods, to
the lesser Ennead of Gods... [to Anubis] in the God’s Shrine, thousands
of offerings of bread, beer, oxen, geese, cattle... to [the Queen
Teta-shera].” This is one of the most interesting inscriptions
discovered in Egypt in recent years, for the picturesqueness of its
diction is unusual.

     * A polite periphrasis for the dead.

As has already been said, the king Amenhetep I was also buried in the
Dra’ Abu-’l-Negga, but the tomb has not yet been found. Amenhetep I and
his mother, Queen Nefret-ari-Aahmes, who is mentioned in the inscription
translated above, were both venerated as tutelary demons of the Western
Necropolis of Thebes after their deaths, as also was Mentuhetep III. At
Dêr el-Bahari both kings seem to have been worshipped with Hathor, the
Mistress of the Waste. The worship of Amen-Râ in the XVIIIth Dynasty
temple of Dêr el-Bahari was a novelty introduced by the priests of Amen
at that time. But the worship of Hathor went on side by side with that
of Amen in a chapel with a rock-cut shrine at the side of the Great
Temple. Very possibly this was the original cave-shrine of Hathor, long
before Mentuhetep’s time, and was incorporated with the Great Temple and
beautified with the addition of a pillared hall before it, built
over part of the XIth Dynasty north court and wall, by Hatshepsu’s
architects.

The Great Temple, the excavation of which for the Egypt Exploration Fund
was successfully brought to an end by Prof. Naville in 1898, was erected
by Queen Hatshepsu in honour of Amen-Râ, her father Thothmes I, and her
brother-husband Thothmes II, and received a few additions from Thothmes
III, her successor. He, however, did not complete it, and it fell into
disrepair, besides suffering from the iconoclastic zeal of the heretic
Akhunaten, who hammered out some of the beautifully painted scenes upon
its walls. These were badly restored by Ramses II, whose painting is
easily distinguished from the original work by the dulness and badness
of its colour.

The peculiar plan and other remarkable characteristics of this temple
are well known. Its great terraces, with the ramps leading up to them,
flanked by colonnades, which, as we have seen, were imitated from the
design of the old XIth Dynasty temple at its side, are familiar from a
hundred illustrations, and the marvellously preserved colouring of its
delicate reliefs is known to every winter visitor to Egypt, and can be
realized by those who have never been there through the medium of Mr.
Howard Carter’s wonderful coloured reproductions, published in Prof.
Naville’s edition of the temple by the Egypt Exploration Fund. The Great
Temple stands to-day clear of all the débris which used to cover it, a
lasting monument to the work of the greatest of the societies which busy
themselves with the unearthing of the relics of the ancient world.

[Illustration: 334.jpg THE TWO TEMPLES OF DES EL-BAHARI.] Excavated by
Prof. Nayille, 1893-8 and 1903-6, for the Egypt Exploration Fund

The two temples of Dêr el-Bahari will soon stand side by side, as they
originally stood, and will always be associated with the name of the
society which rescued them from oblivion, and gave us the treasures
of the royal tombs at Abydos. The names of the two men whom the Egypt
Exploration Fund commissioned to excavate Dêr el-Bahari and Abydos, and
for whose work it exclusively supplied the funds, Profs. Naville and
Petrie, will live chiefly in connection with their work at Dêr el-Bahari
and Abydos.

The Egyptians called the two temples _Tjeserti_, “the two holy places,”
 the new building receiving the name of _Tjeser-tjesru_, “Holy of
Holies,” and the whole tract of Dêr el-Bahari the appellation _Tjesret_,
“the Holy.” The extraordinary beauty of the situation in which they are
placed, with its huge cliffs and rugged hillsides, may be appreciated
from the photograph which is taken from a steep path half-way up the
cliff above the Great Temple. In it we see the Great Temple in the
foreground with the modern roofs of two of its colonnades, devised in
order to protect the sculptures beneath them, the great trilithon gate
leading to the upper court, and the entrance to the cave-shrine of
Amen-Râ, with the niches of the kings on either side, immediately at the
foot of the cliff. In the middle distance is the duller form of the XIth
Dynasty temple, with its rectangular platform, the ramp leading up
to it, and the pyramid in the centre of it, surrounded by pillars,
half-emerging from the great heaps of sand and débris all around. The
background of cliffs and hills, as seen in the photograph, will serve to
give some idea of the beauty of the surroundings,--an arid beauty, it is
true, for all is desert. There is not a blade of vegetation near; all
is salmon-red in colour beneath a sky of ineffable blue, and against the
red cliffs the white temple stands out in vivid contrast.

The second illustration gives a nearer view of the great trilithon
gate in the upper court, at the head of the ramp. The long hill of Dra’
Abu-’l-Negga is seen bending away northward behind the gate.

[Illustration: 346.jpg THE UPPER COURT AND TRILITHON GATE]

     Of The Xviiith Dynasty Temple At Dêk El-Bahari. About 1500
     B.C.

This is the famous gate on which the jealous Thothmes III chiselled out
Hatshepsu’s name in the royal cartouches and inserted his own in
its place; but he forgot to alter the gender of the pronouns in the
accompanying inscription, which therefore reads “King Thothmes III, she
made this monument to her father Amen.”

Among Prof. Naville’s discoveries here one of the most important is that
of the altar in a small court to the north, which, as the inscription
says, was made in honour of the god Râ-Harmachis “of beautiful white
stone of Anu.” It is of the finest white limestone known. Here also were
found the carved ebony doors of a shrine, now in the Cairo Museum. One
of the most beautiful parts of the temple is the Shrine of Anubis, with
its splendidly preserved paintings and perfect columns and roof of
white limestone. The effect of the pure white stone and simplicity of
architecture is almost Hellenic.

The Shrine of Hathor has been known since the time of Mariette, but in
connection with it some interesting discoveries have been made during
the excavation of the XIth Dynasty temple. In the court between the two
temples were found a large number of small votive offerings, consisting
of scarabs, beads, little figures of cows and women, etc., of blue
glazed _faïence_ and rough pottery, bronze and wood, and blue glazed
ware ears, eyes, and plaques with figures of the sacred cow, and other
small objects of the same nature. These are evidently the ex-votos of
the XVIIIth Dynasty fellahîn to the goddess Hathor in the rock-shrine
above the court. When the shrine was full or the little ex-votos broken,
the sacristans threw them over the wall into the court below, which thus
became a kind of dust-heap. Over this heap the sand and débris gradually
collected, and thus they were preserved. The objects found are of
considerable interest to anthropological science.

The Great Temple was built, as we have said, in honour of Thothmes I
and II, and the deities Amen-Râ and Hathor. More especially it was the
funerary chapel of Thothmes I. His tomb was excavated, not in the Dra’
Abu-l-Negga, which was doubtless now too near the capital city and not
in a sufficiently dignified position of aloofness from the common herd,
but at the end of the long valley of the Wadiyên, behind the cliff-hill
above Dêr el-Bahari. Hence the new temple was oriented in the direction
of his tomb. Immediately behind the temple, on the other side of the
hill, is the tomb which was discovered by Lepsius and cleared in 1904
for Mr. Theodore N. Davis by Mr. Howard Carter, then chief inspector of
antiquities at Thebes. Its gallery is of very small dimensions, and it
winds about in the hill in corkscrew fashion like the tomb of Aahmes at
Aby-dos. Owing to its extraordinary length, the heat and foul air in the
depths of the tomb were almost insupportable and caused great difficulty
to the excavators. When the sarcophagus-chamber was at length reached,
it was found to contain the empty sarcophagi of Thothmes I and of
Hatshepsu. The bodies had been removed for safe-keeping in the time of
the XXIst Dynasty, that of Thothmes I having been found with those
of Set! I and Ramses II in the famous pit at Dêr el-Bahari, which was
discovered by M. Maspero in 1881. Thothmes I seems to have had another
and more elaborate tomb (No. 38) in the Valley of the Tombs of the
Kings, which was discovered by M. Loret in 1898. Its frescoes had been
destroyed by the infiltration of water.

The fashion of royal burial in the great valley behind Dêr el-Bahari
was followed during the XVIIIth, XIXth, and XXth Dynasties. Here in the
eastern branch of the Wadiyên, now called the _Bibân el-Mulûk_, “the
Tombs of the Kings,” the greater number of the mightiest Theban Pharaohs
were buried. In the western valley rested two of the kings of the
XVIIIth Dynasty, who desired even more remote burial-places, Amenhetep
III and Ai. The former chose for his last home a most kingly site.
Ancient kings had raised great pyramids of artificial stone over their
graves. Amenhetep, perhaps the greatest and most powerful Pharaoh of
them all, chose to have a natural pyramid for his grave, a mountain for
his tumulus. The illustration shows us the tomb of this monarch, opening
out of the side of one of the most imposing hills in the Western Valley.
No other king but Amenhetep rested beneath this hill, which thus marks
his grave and his only.

It is in the Eastern Valley, the Valley of the Tombs of the Kings
properly speaking, that the tombs of Thothmes I and Hatshepsu lie, and
here the most recent discoveries have been made. It is a desolate spot.
As we come over the hill from Dêr el-Bahari we see below us in the
glaring sunshine a rocky canon, with sides sometimes sheer cliff,
sometimes sloped by great falls of rock in past ages. At the bottom
of these slopes the square openings of the many royal tombs can be
descried. [See illustration.] Far below we see the forms of tourists
and the tomb-guards accompanying them, moving in and out of the openings
like ants going in and out of an ants’ nest. Nothing is heard but the
occasional cry of a kite and the ceaseless rhythmical throbbing of the
exhaust-pipe of the electric light engine in the unfinished tomb of
Ramses XI. Above and around are the red desert hills. The Egyptians
called it “The Place of Eternity.”

[Illustration: 350.jpg THE TOMB-MOUNTAIN OF AMENHETEF III, IN THE
WESTERN VALLEY, THEBES.]

In this valley some remarkable discoveries have been made during the
last few years. In 1898 M. Grébaut discovered the tomb of Amenhetep
II, in which was found the mummy of the king, intact, lying in its
sarcophagus in the depths of the tomb. The royal body now lies there
for all to see. The tomb is lighted with electricity, as are all the
principal tombs of the kings. At the head of the sarcophagus is a single
lamp, and, when the party of visitors is collected in silence around the
place of death, all the lights are turned out, and then the single
light is switched on, showing the royal head illuminated against the
surrounding blackness. The effect is indescribably weird and impressive.
The body has only twice been removed from the tomb since its burial, the
second time when it was for a brief space taken up into the sunlight to
be photographed by Mr.. Carter, in January, 1902. The temporary removal
was carefully carried out, the body of his Majesty being borne up
through the passages of the tomb on the shoulders of the Italian
electric light workmen, preceded and followed by impassive Arab
candle-bearers. The workmen were most reverent in their handling of the
body of “_ il gran ré_,” as they called him.

In the tomb were found some very interesting objects, including a model
boat (afterwards stolen), across which lay the body of a woman. This
body now lies, with others found close by, in a side chamber of the
tomb. One may be that of Hatshepsu. The walls of the tomb-chamber are
painted to resemble papyrus, and on them are written chapters of the
“Book of What Is in the Underworld,” for the guidance of the royal
ghost.

In 1902-3 Mr. Theodore Davis excavated the tomb of Thothmes IV. It
yielded a rich harvest of antiquities belonging to the funeral state of
the king, including a chariot with sides of embossed and gilded leather,
decorated with representations of the king’s warlike deeds, and much
fine blue pottery, all of which are now in the Cairo Museum. The
tomb-gallery returns upon itself, describing a curve. An interesting
point with regard to it is that it had evidently been violated even in
the short time between the reigns of its owner and Horem-heb, probably
in the period of anarchy which prevailed at Thebes during the reign
of the heretic Akhunaten; for in one of the chambers is a hieratic
inscription recording the repair of the tomb in the eighth year of
Horemheb by Maya, superintendent of works in the Tombs of the Kings. It
reads as follows: “In the eighth year, the third month of summer, under
the Majesty of King Tjeser-khepru-Râ Sotp-n-Râ, Son of the Sun, Horemheb
Meriamen, his Majesty (Life, health, and wealth unto him!) commanded
that orders should be sent unto the Fanbearer on the King’s Left Hand,
the King’s Scribe and Overseer of the Treasury, the Overseer of the
Works in the Place of Eternity, the Leader of the Festivals of Amen
in Karnak, Maya, son of the judge Aui, born of the Lady Ueret, that he
should renew the burial of King Men-khepru-Râ, deceased, in the August
Habitation in Western Thebes.” Men-khepru-Râ was the prenomen or
throne-name of Thothmes IV. Tied round a pillar in the tomb is still a
length of the actual rope used by the thieves for crossing the chasm,
which, as in many of the tombs here, was left open in the gallery to bar
the way to plunderers. The mummy of the king was found in the tomb of
Amenhetep II, and is now at Cairo.

The discovery of the tomb of Thothmes I and Hat-shepsu has already been
described. In 1905 Mr. Davis made his latest find, the tomb of Iuaa
and Tuaa, the father and mother of Queen Tii, the famous consort of
Amenhetep III and mother of Akhunaten the heretic. Readers of Prof.
Maspero’s history will remember that Iuaa and Tuaa are mentioned on one
of the large memorial scarabs of Amenhetep III, which commemorates his
marriage. The tomb has yielded an almost incredible treasure of funerary
furniture, besides the actual mummies of Tii’s parents, including a
chariot overlaid with gold. Gold overlay of great thickness is found on
everything, boxes, chairs, etc. It was no wonder that Egypt seemed the
land of gold to the Asiatics, and that even the King of Babylon begs
this very Pharaoh Amenhetep to send him gold, in one of the letters
found at Tell el-Amarna, “for gold is as water in thy land.” It is
probable that Egypt really attained the height of her material wealth
and prosperity in the reign of Amenhetep III. Certainly her dominion
reached its farthest limits in his time, and his influence was felt from
the Tigris to the Sudan. He hunted lions for his pleasure in Northern
Mesopotamia, and he built temples at Jebel Barkal beyond Dongola. We see
the evidence of lavish wealth in the furniture of the tomb of Iuaa and
Tuaa. Yet, fine as are many of these gold-overlaid and overladen objects
of the XVIIIth Dynasty, they have neither the good taste nor the charm
of the beautiful jewels from the XIIth Dynasty tombs at Dashûr. It is
mere vulgar wealth. There is too much gold thrown about. “For gold is as
water in thy land.” In three hundred years’ time Egypt was to know what
poverty meant, when the poor priest-kings of the XXIst Dynasty could
hardly keep body and soul together and make a comparatively decent show
as Pharaohs of Egypt. Then no doubt the latter-day Thebans sighed for
the good old times of the XVIIIth Dynasty, when their city ruled a
considerable part of Africa and Western Asia and garnered their riches
into her coffers. But the days of the XIIth Dynasty had really been
better still. Then there was not so much wealth, but what there was (and
there was as much gold then, too) was used sparingly, tastefully, and
simply. The XIIth Dynasty, not the XVIIIth, was the real Golden Age of
Egypt.

From the funeral panoply of a tomb like that of Iuaa and Tuaa we can
obtain some idea of the pomp and state of Amenhetep III. But the remains
of his Theban palace, which have been discovered and excavated by Mr. C.
Tytus and Mr. P. E. Newberry, do not bear out this idea of magnificence.
It is quite possible that the palace was merely a pleasure house,
erected very hastily and destined to fall to pieces when its owner tired
of it or died, like the many palaces of the late Khedive Ismail. It
stood on the border of an artificial lake, whereon the Pharaoh and his
consort Tii sailed to take their pleasure in golden barks. This is now
the cultivated rectangular space of land known as the Birket Habû, which
is still surrounded by the remains of the embankment built to retain its
waters, and becomes a lake during the inundation. On the western shore
of this lake Amenhetep erected the “stately pleasure dome,” the
remains of which still cover the sandy tract known as el-Malkata, “the
Salt-pans,” south of the great temple of Medînet Habû. These remains
consist merely of the foundations and lowest wall-courses of a
complicated and rambling building of many chambers, constructed of
common unburnt brick and plastered with white stucco on walls and
floors, on which were painted beautiful frescoes of fighting bulls,
birds of the air, water-fowl, fish-ponds, etc., in much the same style
as the frescoes of Tell el-Amarna executed in the next reign. There
were small pillared halls, the columns of which were of wood, mounted
on bases of white limestone. The majority still remain in position. In
several chambers there are small daïses, and in one the remains of a
throne, built of brick and mud covered with plaster and stucco, upon
which the Pharaoh Amenhetep sat. This is the palace of him whom the
Greeks called Memnon, who ruled Egypt when Israel was in bondage and
when the dynasty of Minos reigned in Crete. Here by the side of his
pleasure-lake the most powerful of Egyptian Pharaohs whiled away his
time during the summer heats. Evidently the building was intended to be
of the lightest construction, and never meant to last; but to our ideas
it seems odd that an Egyptian Pharaoh should live in a mud palace. Such
a building is, however, quite suited to the climate of Egypt, as are the
modern crude brick dwellings of the fellahîn. In the ruins of the
palace were found several small objects of interest, and close by was
an ancient glass manufactory of Amenhetep III’s time, where much of the
characteristic beautifully coloured and variegated opaque glass of the
period was made.

[Illustration: 356.jpg THE TOMB-HILL OF SHEKH ‘ABD EL-KUBNA, THEBES.]

The tombs of the magnates of Amenhetep III’s reign and of the reigns
of his immediate predecessors were excavated, as has been said, on the
eastern slope of the hill of Shêkh ‘Abd el-Kûrna, where was the earliest
Theban necropolis. No doubt many of the early tombs of the time of the
VIth Dynasty were appropriated and remodelled by the XVIIIth Dynasty
magnates. We have an instance of time’s revenge in this matter, in the
case of the tomb of Imadua, a great priestly official of the time of
the XXth Dynasty. This tomb previously belonged to an XVIIIth Dynasty
worthy, but Imadua appropriated it three hundred years later and covered
up all its frescoes with the much begilt decoration fashionable in his
period. Perhaps the XVIIIth Dynasty owner had stolen it from an original
owner of the time of the VIth Dynasty. The tomb has lately been cleared
out by Mr. Newberry.

Much work of the same kind has been done here of late years by Messrs.
Newberry and R. L. Mond, in succession. To both we are indebted for the
excavation of many known tombs, as well as for the discovery of many
others previously unknown. Among the former was that of Sebekhetep,
cleared by Mr. Newberry. Se-bekhetep was an official of the time of
Thothmes III. From his tomb, and from others in the same hill, came many
years ago the fine frescoes shown in the illustration, which are among
the most valued treasures of the Egyptian department of the British
Museum. They are typical specimens of the wall-decoration of an XVIIIth
Dynasty tomb. On one may be seen a bald-headed peasant, with staff in
hand, pulling an ear of corn from the standing crop in order to see if
it is ripe. He is the “Chief Reaper,” and above him is a prayer that the
“great god in heaven” may increase the crop. To the right of him is a
charioteer standing beside a car and reining back a pair of horses, one
black, the other bay. Below is another charioteer with two white
horses. He sits on the floor of the car with his back to them, eating
or resting, while they nibble the branches of a tree close by. Another
scene is that of a scribe keeping tally of offerings brought to the
tomb, while fellahm are bringing flocks of geese and other fowl, some in
crates. The inscription above is apparently addressed by the goose-herd
to the man with the crates. It reads: “Hasten thy feet because of the
geese! Hearken! thou knowest not the next minute what has been said
to thee!” Above, a reïs with a stick bids other peasants squat on the
ground before addressing the scribe, and he is saying to them: “Sit ye
down to talk.” The third scene is in another style; on it may be seen
Semites bringing offerings of vases of gold, silver, and copper to the
royal presence, bowing themselves to the ground and kissing the dust
before the throne. The fidelity and accuracy with which the racial type
of the tribute-bearers is given is most extraordinary; every face
seems a portrait, and each one might be seen any day now in the Jewish
quarters of Whitechapel.

[Illustration: 358.jpg Wall-Painting from a Tomb]

The first two paintings are representative of a very common style of
fresco-pictures in these tombs. The care with which the animals
are depicted is remarkable. Possibly one of the finest Egyptian
representations of an animal is the fresco of a goat in the tomb of
Gen-Amen, discovered by Mr. Mond. There is even an attempt here at
chiaroscuro, which is unknown to Egyptian art generally, except at Tell
el-Amarna. Evidently the Egyptian painters reached the apogee of
their art towards the end of the XVIIIth Dynasty. The third, the
representation of tribute-bearers, is of a type also well known at
this period. In all the chief tombs we have processions of Egyptians,
Westerners, Northerners, Easterners, and Southerners, bringing tribute
to the Pharaoh. The North is represented by the Semites, the East by the
Punites (when they occur), the South by negroes, the West by the Keftiu
or people of Crete and Cyprus. The representations of the last-named
people have become of the very highest interest during the last few
years, on account of the discoveries in Crete, which have revealed to
us the state and civilization of these very Keftiu. Messrs. Evans
and Halbherr have discovered at Knossos and Phaistos the cities and
palace-temples of the king who sent forth their ambassadors to far-away
Egypt with gifts for the mighty Pharaoh; these ambassadors were painted
in the tombs of their hosts as representative of the quarter of the
world from which they came.

The two chief Egyptian representations of these people, who since they
lived in Greece may be called Greeks, though their more proper title
would be “Pe-lasgians,” are to be found in the tombs of Rekhmarâ and
Senmut, the former a vizier under Thothmes III, the latter the
architect of Hatshepsu’s temple at Dêr el-Bahari. Senmut’s tomb is a
new rediscovery. It was known, as Rekhmarâ’s was, in the early days of
Egyptological science, and Prisse d’Avennes copied its paintings. It was
afterwards lost sight of until rediscovered by Mr. Newberry and Prof.
Steindorff.

[Illustration: 360.jpg FRESCO IN THE TOMB OF SENMUT AT THEBES.] About
1500 B.C.

The tomb of Rekhmarâ (No. 35) is well known to every visitor to Thebes,
but it is difficult to get at that of Senmut (No. 110); it lies at the
top of the hill round to the left and overlooking Dêr el-Bahari,
an appropriate place for it, by the way. In some ways Senmut’s
representations are more interesting than Rekhmarâ’s. They are more
easily seen, since they are now in the open air, the fore hall of the
tomb having been ruined; and they are better preserved, since they have
not been subjected to a century of inspection with naked candles and
pawing with greasy hands, as have Rekhmarâ’s frescoes. Further, there
is no possibility of mistaking what they represent. From right to
left, walking in procession, we see the Minoan gift-bearers from Crete,
carrying in their hands and on their shoulders great cups of gold and
silver, in shape like the famous gold cups found at Vaphio in Lakonia,
but much larger, also a ewer of gold and silver exactly like one of
bronze discovered by Mr. Evans two years ago at Knossos, and a huge
copper jug with four ring-handles round the sides. All these vases are
specifically and definitely Mycenaean, or rather, following the new
terminology, Minoan. They are of Greek manufacture and are carried on
the shoulders of Pelasgian Greeks. The bearers wear the usual Mycenaean
costume, high boots and a gaily ornamented kilt, and little else, just
as we see it depicted in the fresco of the Cupbearer at Knossos and
in other Greek representations. The coiffure, possibly the most
characteristic thing about the Mycenaean Greeks, is faithfully
represented by the Egyptians both here and in Rekhmarâ’s tomb. The
Mycenaean men allowed their hair to grow to its full natural length,
like women, and wore it partly hanging down the back, partly tied up
in a knot or plait (the _kepas_ of the dandy Paris in the Iliad) on the
crown of the head. This was the universal fashion, and the Keftiu are
consistently depicted by the XVIIIth Dynasty Egyptians as following it.
The faces in the Senmut fresco are not so well portrayed as those in the
Rekhmarâ fresco. There it is evident that the first three ambassadors
are faithfully depicted, as the portraits are marked. The procession
advances from left to right. The first man, “the Great Chief of the
Kefti and the Isles of the Green Sea,” is young, and has a remarkably
small mouth with an amiable expression. His complexion is fair rather
than dark, but his hair is dark brown. His lieutenant, the next in
order, is of a different type,--elderly, with a most forbidding visage,
Roman nose, and nutcracker jaws. Most of the others are very much
alike,--young, dark in complexion, and with long black hair hanging
below their waists and twisted up into fantastic knots and curls on the
tops of their heads. One, carrying on his shoulder a great silver vase
with curving handles and in one hand a dagger of early European Bronze
Age type, is looking back to hear some remark of his next companion.
Any one of these gift-bearers might have sat for the portrait of
the Knossian Cupbearer, the fresco discovered by Mr. Evans in the
palace-temple of Minos; he has the same ruddy brown complexion, the same
long black hair dressed in the same fashion, the same parti-coloured
kilt, and he bears his vase in much the same way. We have only to allow
for the difference of Egyptian and Mycenaean ways of drawing. There is
no doubt whatever that these Keftiu of the Egyptians were Cretans of the
Minoan Age. They used to be considered Phoenicians, but this view was
long ago exploded. They are not Semites, and that is quite enough.
Neither are they Asiatics of any kind. They are purely and simply
Mycenaean, or rather Minoan, Greeks of the pre-Hellenic period--Pelasgi,
that is to say.

Probably no discovery of more far-reaching importance to our knowledge
of the history of the world generally and of our own culture especially
has ever been made than the finding of Mycenæ by Schliemann, and
the further finds that have resulted therefrom, culminating in the
discoveries of Mr. Arthur Evans at Knossos. Naturally, these discoveries
are of extraordinary interest to us, for they have revealed the
beginnings and first bloom of the European civilization of to-day. For
our culture-ancestors are neither the Egyptians, nor the Assyrians, nor
the Hebrews, but the Hellenes, and they, the Aryan-Greeks, derived most
of their civilization from the pre-Hellenic people whom they found in
the land before them, the Pelasgi or “Mycenæan” Greeks, “Minoans,” as we
now call them, the Keftiu of the Egyptians. These are the ancient Greeks
of the Heroic Age, to which the legends of the Hellenes refer; in their
day were fought the wars of Troy and of the Seven against Thebes, in
their day the tragedy of the Atridse was played out to its end, in their
day the wise Minos ruled Knossos and the _Ægean_. And of all the events
which are at the back of these legends we know nothing. The hiéroglyphed
tablets of the pre-Hellenic Greeks lie before us, but we cannot read
them; we can only see that the Minoan writing in many ways resembled
the Egyptian, thus again confirming our impression of the original early
connection of the two cultures.

In view of this connection, and the known close relations between Crete
and Egypt, from the end of the XIIth Dynasty to the end of the XVIIIth,
we might have hoped to recover at Knossos a bilingual inscription in
Cretan and Egyptian hieroglyphs which would give us the key to the
Minoan script and tell us what we so dearly wish to know. But this hope
has not yet been realized. Two Egyptian inscriptions have been found at
Knossos, but no bilingual one. A list of Keftian names is preserved in
the British Museum upon an Egyptian writing-board from Thebes with what
is perhaps a copy of a single Cretan hieroglyph, a vase; but again,
nothing bilingual. A list of “Keftian words” occurs at the head of a
papyrus, also in the British Museum, but they appear to be nonsense,
a mere imitation of the sounds of a strange tongue. Still we need
not despair of finding the much desired Cretan-Egyptian bilingual
inscription yet. Perhaps the double text of a treaty between Crete and
Egypt, like that of Ramses II with the Hittites, may come to light.
Meanwhile we can only do our best with the means at our hand to trace
out the history of the relations of the oldest European culture with
the ancient civilization of Egypt. The tomb-paintings at Thebes are very
important material. Eor it is due to them that the voice of the doubter
has finally ceased to be heard, and that now no archaeologist questions
that the Egyptians were in direct communication with the Cretan
Mycenæans in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, some fifteen hundred years
before Christ, for no one doubts that the pictures of the Keftiu are
pictures of Mycenaeans.

As we have seen, we know that this connection was far older than the
time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, but it is during that time and the Hyksos
period that we have the clearest documentary proof of its existence,
from the statuette of Abnub and the alabastron lid of King Khian,
found at Knossos, down to the Mycenaean pottery fragments found at Tell
el-Amarna, a site which has been utterly abandoned since the time of
the heretic Akhunaten (B.C. 1430), so that there is no possibility of
anything found there being later than his time. That the connection
existed as late as the time of the XXth Dynasty we know from the
representations of golden _Bügelkannen_ or false-necked vases of
Mycenaean form in the tomb of Ramses III in the Bibân el-Mulûk, and of
golden cups of Vaphio type in the tomb of Imadua, already mentioned.
This brings the connection down to about 1050 B.C.

After that date we cannot hope to find any certain evidence of
connection, for by that time the Mycenaean civilization had probably
come to an end. In the days of the XIIth and XVIIIth Dynasties a great
and splendid power evidently existed in Crete, and sent its peaceful
ambassadors, the Keftiu who are represented in the Theban tombs, to
Egypt. But with the XIXth Dynasty the name of the Keftiu disappears from
Egyptian records, and their place is taken by a congeries of warring
seafaring tribes, whose names as given by the Egyptians seem to be forms
of tribal and place names well known to us in the Greece of later days.
We find the Akaivasha (_Axaifol_, Achaians), Shakalsha (Sagalassians of
Pisidia), Tursha (Tylissians of Crete?), and Shardana (Sardians) allied
with the Libyans and Mashauash (Maxyes) in a land attack upon Egypt in
the days of Meneptah, the successor of Ramses II--just as in the later
days of the XXVIth Dynasty the Northern pirates visited the African
shore of the Mediterranean, and in alliance with the predatory Libyans
attacked Egypt.

Prof. Petrie has lately [History of Egypt, iii, pp. Ill, I12.] proffered
an alternative view, which would make all these tribes Tunisians and
Algerians, thus disposing of the identification of the Akaivasha with
the Achaians, and making them the ancient representatives of the town
of el-Aghwat (Roman Agbia) in Tunis. But several difficulties might be
pointed out which are in the way of an acceptance of this view, and it
is probable that the older identifications with Greek tribes must still
be retained, so that Meneptah’s Akaivasha are evidently the ancient
representatives of the Achai(v)ans, the Achivi of the Roman poets. The
terminations _sha_ and _na_, which appear in these names, are merely
ethnic and locative affixes belonging to the Asianic language system
spoken by these tribes at that time, to which the language of the Minoan
Cretans (which is written in the Knossian hieroglyphs) belonged. They
existed in ancient Lycian in the forms _azzi_ and _nna_, and we find
them enshrined in the Asia Minor place-names terminating in _assos_
and _nda_, as Halikarnassos, Sagalassos (Shakalasha in Meneptah’s
inscription), Oroanda, and Labraunda (which, as we have seen, is the
same as the [Greek word], a word of pre-Hellenic origin, both meaning
“Place of the Double Axe”) The identification of these _sha_ and _nal_
terminations in the Egyptian transliterations of the foreign names, with
the Lycian affixes referred to, was made some five years ago,* and is
now generally accepted. We have, then, to find the equivalents of
these names, to strike off the final termination, as in the case of
Akaiva-sha, where Akaiva only is the real name, and this seems to be
the Egyptian equivalent of _Axaifol_, Achivi. It is strange to meet with
this great name on an Egyptian monument of the thirteenth century B.C.
But yet not so strange, when we recollect that it is precisely to that
period that Greek legend refers the war of Troy, which was an attack
by Greek tribes from all parts of the Ægean upon the Asianic city
at Hissarlik in the Troad, exactly parallel to the attacks of the
Northerners on Egypt. And Homer preserves many a reminiscence of early
Greek visits, peaceful and the reverse, to the coast of Egypt at this
period. The reader will have noticed that one no longer treats the siege
of Troy as a myth. To do so would be to exhibit a most uncritical mind;
even the legends of King Arthur have a historic foundation, and those of
the Nibelungen are still more probable.

     * See Hall, Oldest Civilization of Greece, p. 178/.

[Illustration: 368.jpg Page Image to display Greek words]

[Illustration: 369.jpg Page Image to display Greek words]

In the eighth year of Ramses III the second Northern attack was made,
by the Pulesta (_Pelishtim_, Philistines), Tjakaray, Shakalasha
(Sagalassians), Vashasha, and Danauna or Daanau, in alliance with North
Syrian tribes. The Danauna are evidently the ancient representatives of
the _Aavaoî_, the Danaans who formed the bulk of the Greek army against
Troy under the leadership of the long-haired Achaians, [Greek words]
(like the Keftiu). The Vashasha have been identified by the writer with
the Axians, the [Greek word] of Crete. Prof. Petrie compares the name
of the Tjakaray with that of the (modern) place Zakro in Crete.
Identifications with modern place-names are of doubtful value;
for instance, we cannot but hold that Prof. Petrie errs greatly in
identifying the name of the Pidasa (another tribe mentioned in Ramses
II’s time) with that of the river Pidias in Cyprus. “Pidias” is a purely
modern corruption of the ancient Pediseus, which means the “plain-river”
 (because it flows through the central plain of the island), from the
Greek [Greek word]. If, then, we make the Pidasa Cypriotes we assume
that pure Greek was spoken in Cyprus as early as 1100 b. c, which is
highly improbable. The Pidasa were probably Le-leges (Pedasians); the
name of Pisidia may be the same, by metathesis. Pedasos is a name always
connected with the much wandering tribe of the Leleges, where-ever they
are found in Lakonia or in Asia Minor. We believe them to have been
known to the Egyptians as Pidasa. The identification of the Tjakaray
with Zakro is very tempting. The name was formerly identified with
that of the Teukrians, but the v in the word Tewpot lias always been a
stumbling-block in the way. Perhaps Zakro is neither more nor less than
the Tetkpoc-name, since the legendary Teucer, the archer, was connected
with the eastern or Eteokretan end of Crete, where Zakro lies. In
Mycenæan times Zakro was an important place, so that the Tjakaray may
be the Teukroi, after all, and Zakro may preserve the name. At any rate,
this identification is most alluring and, taken in conjunction with
the other cumulative identifications, is very probable; but the
identification of the Pidæa with the river Pediæus in Cyprus is
neither alluring nor probable.

In the time of Ramses II some of these Asia Minor tribes had marched
against Egypt as allies of the Hittites. We find among them the Luka or
Lycians, the Dardenui (Dardanians, who may possibly have been at that
time in the Troad, or elsewhere, for all these tribes were certainly
migratory), and the Masa (perhaps the Mysians). With the Cretans of
Ramses Ill’s time must be reckoned the Pulesta, who are certainly the
Philistines, then most probably in course of their traditional migration
from Crete to Palestine. In Philistia recent excavations by Mr. Welch
have disclosed the unmistakable presence of a late Mycenæan culture,
and we can only ascribe this to the Philistines, who were of Cretan
origin.

Thus we see that all these Northern tribal names hold together with
remarkable persistence, and in fact refuse to be identified with any
tribes but those of Asia Minor and the Ægean. In them we see the broken
remnants of the old Minoan (Keftian) power, driven hither and thither
across the seas by intestinal feuds, and “winding the skein of grievous
wars till every man of them perished,” as Homer says of the heroes after
the siege of Troy. These were in fact the wanderings of the heroes, the
period of _Sturm und Drang_ which succeeded the great civilized epoch of
Minos and his thalassocracy, of Knossos, Phaistos, and the Keftius.
On the walls of the temple of Medînet Habû, Ramses III depicted the
portraits of the conquered heroes who had fallen before the Egyptian
onslaught, and he called them heroes, _tuher_ in Egyptian, fully
recognizing their Berserker gallantry. Above all in interest are the
portraits of the Philistines, those Greeks who at this very time seized
part of Palestine (which takes its name from them), and continued to
exist there as a separate people (like the Normans in France) for at
least two centuries. Goliath the giant was, then, a Greek; certainly he
was of Cretan descent, and so a Pelasgian.

Such are the conclusions to which modern discovery in Crete has impelled
us with regard to the pictures of the Keftiu at Shêkh ‘Abd el-Kûrna. It
is indeed a new chapter in the history of the relations of ancient Egypt
with the outside world that Dr. Arthur Evans has opened for us. And in
this connection some American work must not be overlooked. An expedition
sent out by the University of Pennsylvania, under Miss Harriet Boyd,
has discovered much of importance to Mycenæan study in the ruins of an
ancient town at Gournia in Crete, east of Knossos. Here, however, little
has been found that will bear directly on the question of relations
between Mycenaean Greece and Egypt.

The Theban nécropoles of the New Empire are by no means exhausted by a
description of the Tombs of the Kings and Shêkh ‘Abd el-Kûrna; but few
new discoveries have been made anywhere except in the picturesque valley
of the Tombs of the Queens, south of Shêkh ‘Abd el-Kûrna. Here the
Italian Egyptologist, Prof. Schiaparelli, has lately discovered and
excavated some very fine tombs of the XIXth and XXth Dynasties. The best
is that of Queen Nefertari, one of the wives of Ramses II. The colouring
of the reliefs upon these walls is extraordinarily bright, and the
portraits of the queen, who has a very beautiful face, with aquiline
nose, are wonderfully preserved. She was of the dark type, while another
queen, Titi by name, who was buried close by, was fair, and had a
retroussé nose. Prof. Schiaparelli also discovered here the tombs of
some princes of the XXth Dynasty, who died young. All the tombs are
much alike, with a single short gallery, on the walls of which are
mythological scenes, figures of the prince and of his father, the king,
etc., painted in a crude style, which shows a great degeneration from
that of the XVIIIth Dynasty tombs.

We now leave the great necropolis and turn to the later temples of the
Western Bank at Thebes. These were of a funerary character, like those
of Dêr el-Bahari, already described. The most imposing of all in some
respects is the Ramesseum, where lies the huge granite colossus of
Ramses II, prostrate and broken, which Diodorus knew as the statue of
Osymandyas. This name is a late corruption of Ramses II’s throne-name,
User-maat-Rà, pronounced Ûsimare. The temple has been cleared by
Mr. Howard Carter for the Egyptian government, and the small town of
priests’ houses, magazines, and cellars, to the west of it, has been
excavated by him. This is quite a little Pompeii, with its small
streets, its houses with the stucco still clinging to the walls, its
public altar, its market colonnade, and its gallery of statues. The
statues are only of brick like the walls, and roughly shaped and
plastered, but they were portraits, undoubtedly, of celebrities of
the time, though we do not know of whom. On either side are the long
magazines in which were kept the possessions of the priests of the
Ramesseum, the grain from the lands with which they were endowed, and
everything meet to be offered to the ghost of the king whom they served.
The plan of the place had evidently been altered after the time of
Ramses II, as remains of overbuilding were found here and there. The
magazines were first investigated in 1896 by Prof. Petrie, who also
found in the neighbourhood the remains of a number of small royal
funerary temples of the XVIIIth Dynasty, all looking in the direction of
the hill, beyond which lay the tombs of the kings.

[Illustration: 372.jpg THE VALLEY OF THE TOMBS OF THE QUEENS AT THEBES.]

     In which Prof. Schiaparelli discovered the tomb of Ramses
     II’s wife (1904).

We may now turn to Luxor, where immediately above the landing-place of
the steamers and dahabiyas rise the stately coloured colonnades of the
Temple of Luxor. Unfortunately, modern excavations have not been
allowed to pursue their course to completion here, as in the first great
colonnaded court, which was added by Ramses II to the original building
of Amenhetep III, Tutankhamen, and Horemheb, there still remains
the Mohammedan Mosque of Abu-’l-Haggâg, which may not be removed.
Abu-’l-Haggâg, “the Father of Pilgrims” (so called on account of the
number of pilgrims to his shrine), was a very holy shêkh, and his memory
is held in the greatest reverence by the Luksuris. It is unlucky that
this mosque was built within the court of the Great Temple, and it
cannot be removed till Moslem religious prejudices become at least
partially ameliorated, and then the work of completely excavating the
Temple of Luxor may be carried out.

Between Luxor and Karnak lay the temple of the goddess Mut, consort of
Amen and protectress of Thebes. It stood in the part of the city known
as Asheru. This building was cleared in 1895 at the expense and under
the supervision of two English ladies, Miss Benson and Miss Gourlay.

[Illustration: 374.jpg THE NILE-BANK AT LUXOR]

     With A Dahabîya And A Steamer Of The Anglo-American Nile
     Company.

The temple had always been remarkable on account of the prodigious
number of seated figures of the lioness-headed goddess Sekhemet, or
Pakhet, which it contains, dedicated by Amenhetep III and Sheshenk I;
most of those in the British Museum were brought from this temple.
The excavators found many more of them, and also some very interesting
portrait-statues of the late period which had been dedicated there.
The most important of these was the head and shoulders of a statue of
Mentuemhat, governor of Thebes at the time of the sack of the city by
Ashur-bani-pal of Assyria in 668 B.C. In Miss Benson’s interesting book,
_The Temple of Mut in Asher_, it is suggested, on the authority of Prof.
Petrie, that his facial type is Cypriote, but this speculation is a
dangerous one, as is also the similar speculation that the wonderful
portrait-head of an old man found by Miss Benson [* Plate vii of her
book.] is of Philistine type. We have only to look at the faces of
elderly Egyptians to-day to see that the types presented by Mentuemhat
and Miss Benson’s “Philistine” need be nothing but pure Egyptian. The
whole work of the clearing was most efficiently carried out, and the
Cairo Museum obtained from it some valuable specimens of Egyptian
sculpture.

The Great Temple of Karnak is one of the chief cares of the Egyptian
Department of Antiquities. Its paramount importance, so to speak, as the
cathedral temple of Egypt, renders its preservation and exploration a
work of constant necessity, and its great extent makes this work one
which is always going on and which probably will be going on for many
years to come. The Temple of Karnak has cost the Egyptian government
much money, yet not a piastre of this can be grudged. For several years
past the works have been under the charge of M. Georges Legrain, the
well-known engineer and draughtsman who was associated with M. de
Morgan in the work at Dashûr. His task is to clear out the whole temple
thoroughly, to discover in it what previous investigators have left
undiscovered, and to restore to its original position what has fallen.

[Illustration: 376.jpg THE GREAT TEMPLE OP KAKNAK.]

     The left-hand obelisk is the highest in Egypt, and was
     erected by Hatshepsu; the right-hand obelisk was put up by
     Thothmes III. No general work of restoration is
     contemplated, nor would this be in the slightest degree
     desirable. Up to the present M. Legrain has certainly
     carried out all three branches of his task with great
     success. An unforeseen event has, however, considerably
     complicated and retarded the work.

In October, 1899, one of the columns of the side aisles of the great
Hypostyle Hall fell, bringing down with it several others. The whole
place was a chaotic ruin, and for a moment it seemed as though the whole
of the Great Hall, one of the wonders of the world, would collapse.
The disaster was due to the gradual infiltration of water from the Nile
beneath the structure, whose foundations, as is usual in Egypt, were of
the flimsiest description. Even the most imposing Egyptian temples
have jerry-built foundations; usually they are built on the top of the
wall-stumps of earlier buildings of different plan, filled in with a
confused mass of earlier slabs and weak rubbish of all kinds. Had the
Egyptian buildings been built on sure foundations, they would have been
preserved to a much greater extent even than they are. In such a climate
as that of Egypt a stone building well built should last for ever.

M. Legrain has for the last five years been busy repairing the damage.
All the fallen columns are now restored to the perpendicular, and the
capitals and architraves are in process of being hoisted into their
original positions. The process by which M. Legrain carries out this
work has been already described. He works in the old Egyptian fashion,
building great inclines or ramps of earth up which the pillar-drums,
the capitals, and the architrave-blocks are hauled by manual labour, and
then swung into position. This is the way in which the Egyptians built
Karnak, and in this way, too, M. Le-grain is rebuilding it. It is a slow
process, but a sure one, and now it will not be long before we shall
see the hall, except its roof, in much the same condition as it was when
Seti built it. Lovers of the picturesque will, however, miss the famous
leaning column, hanging poised across the hall, which has been a main
feature in so many pictures and photographs of Karnak. This fell in the
catastrophe of 1899, and naturally it has not been possible to restore
it to its picturesque, but dangerous, position.

The work at Karnak has been distinguished during the last two years by
two remarkable discoveries. Outside the main temple, to the north of
the Hypostyle Hall, M. Legrain found a series of private sanctuaries or
shrines, built of brick by personages of the XVIIIth Dynasty and later,
in order to testify their devotion to Amen. In these small cells were
found some remarkable statues, one of which is illustrated. It is one of
the most perfect of its kind. A great dignitary of the XVIIIth Dynasty
is seen seated with his wife, their daughter standing between them.
Round his neck are four chains of golden rings, with which he had been
decorated by the Pharaoh for his services. It is a remarkable group,
interesting for its style and workmanship as well as for its subject. As
an example of the formal hieratic type of portraiture it is very fine.

The other and more important discovery of the two was made by M. Legrain
on the south side of the Hypo-style Hall.

[Illustration: 379.jpg THE GREAT TEMPLE OP KAKNAK.]

The left-hand obelisk is the highest in Egypt, and was erected by
Hatshepsu; the right-hand obelisk was put up by Thothmes III.

M. de Morgan in the work at Dashûr. His task is to clear out the whole
temple thoroughly, to discover in it what previous investigators have
left undiscovered, and to restore to its original position what has
fallen. Tentative excavations, begun in an unoccupied tract under the
wall of the hall, resulted in the discovery of parts of statues; the
place was then regularly excavated, and the result has been amazing.
The ground was full of statues, large and small, at some unknown period
buried pell-mell, one on the top of another. Some are broken, but the
majority are perfect, which is in itself unusual, and is due very much
to the soft, muddy soil in which they have lain. Statues found on dry
desert land are often terribly cracked, especially when they are of
black granite, the crystals of which seem to have a greater tendency to
disintegration than have those of the red syenite. The Karnak statues
are figures of pious persons, who had dedicated portraits of themselves
in the temple of Amen, together with those of great men whom the king
had honoured by ordering their statues placed in the temple during their
lives.

Of this number was the great sage Amenhetep, son of Hapi, the founder of
the little desert temple of Dêr el-Medîna, near Dêr el-Bahari, who was
a sort of prime minister under Amenhetep III, and was venerated in later
days as a demigod. His statue was found with the others by M. Legrain.
Among them is a figure made entirely of green felspar, an unusual
material for so large a statuette. A fine portrait of Thothmes III was
also found. The illustration shows this wonderfully fruitful excavation
in progress, with the diggers at work in the black mud soil, in the
foreground the basket-boys carrying away the rubbish on their shoulders,
and the massive granite walls of the Great Hypostyle Hall of Seti in the
background. The huge size of the roof-blocks is noticeable. These are
not the actual uppermost roof-blocks, but only the architraves from
pillar to pillar; the original roof consisted of similar blocks laid
across in the transverse direction from architrave to architrave. An
Egyptian granite temple was in fact built upon the plan of a child’s box
of bricks; it was but a modified and beautified Stonehenge.

[Illustration: 381.jpg PORTRAIT-GROUP OF A GREAT NOBLE AND HIS WIFE]

     Of The Time Of The Xviiith Dynasty. Discovered by M. Legrain
     at Karnak.

Other important discoveries have been made by M. Legrain in the course
of his work.

[Illustration: 382.jpg A TOMB PITTED UP AS AN EXPLORER’S RESIDENCE.]

     The Tomb of Pentu (No. 5) at Tell el-Amarna, inhabited by
     Mr. de G. Davies during his work for the Archaeological
     Survey of Egypt (Egypt Exploration Fund). About 1400 B.C.

Among them are statues of the late Middle Kingdom, including one of King
Usertsen (Senusret) IV of the XIIIth Dynasty. There are also reliefs of
the reign of Amenhetep I, which are remarkable for the delicacy of their
workmanship and the sureness of their technique.

We know that the temple was built as early as the time of TJsertsen,
for in it have been found one or two of his blocks; and no doubt the
original shrine, which was rebuilt in the time of Philip Arrhidseus, was
of the same period, but hitherto no remains of the centuries between his
time and that of Hatshepsu had been found. With M. Legrain’s work in the
greatest temple of Thebes we finish our account of the new discoveries
in the chief city of ancient Egypt, as we began it with the work of M.
Naville in the oldest temple there.

One of the most interesting questions connected with the archaeology
of Thebes is that which asks whether the heretical disk-worshipper
Akhunaten (Amenhetep IV) erected buildings there, and whether any
trace of them has ever been discovered. To those who are interested in
Egyptian history and religion the transitory episode of the disk-worship
heresy is already familiar. The precise character of the heretical
dogma, which Amenhetep IV proclaimed and desired his subjects to.
accept, has lately been well explained by Mr. de Garis Davies in his
volumes, published by the “Archaeological Survey of Egypt” branch of
the Egypt Exploration Fund, on the tombs of el-Amarna. He shows that the
heretical doctrine was a monotheism of a very high order. Amenhetep IV
(or as he preferred to call himself, Akhunaten, “Glory of the Disk”) did
not, as has usually been supposed, merely worship the Sun-disk itself
as the giver of life, and nothing more. He venerated the glowing disk
merely as the visible emanation of the deity behind it, who dispensed
heat and life to all living things through its medium. The disk was, so
to speak, the window in heaven through which the unknown God, the “Lord
of the Disk,” shed a portion of his radiance on the world. Now, given
an ignorance of the true astronomical character of the sun, we see how
eminently rational a religion this was. In effect, the sun is the source
of all life upon this earth, and so Akhunaten caused its rays to be
depicted each with a hand holding out the sign of life to the earth. The
monotheistic worship of the sun alone is certainly the highest form of
pagan religion, but Akhunaten saw further than this. His doctrine was
that there was a deity behind the sun, whose glory shone through it and
gave us life. This deity was unnamed and unnamable; he was “the Lord
of the Disk.” We see in his heresy, therefore, the highest attitude
to which religious ideas had attained before the days of the Hebrew
prophets.

This religion seems to have been developed out of the philosophical
speculations of the priests of the Sun at Heliopolis. Akhunaten with
unwise iconoclastic zeal endeavoured to root out the worship of the
ancient gods of Egypt, and especially that of Amen-Bà, the ruler of the
Egyptian pantheon, whose primacy in the hearts of the people made him
the most redoubtable rival of the new doctrine. But the name of the
old Sun-god Bà-Harmaehis was spared, and it is evident that Akhunaten
regarded him as more or less identical with his god.

It has been supposed by Prof. Petrie that Queen Tii, the mother of
Akhunaten, was of Mitannian (Armenian) origin, and that she brought the
Aten religion to Egypt from her native land, and taught it to her son.
Certainly it seems as though the new doctrine had made some headway
before the death of Amenhetep III, but we have no reason to attribute it
to Tii, or to suppose that she brought it with her from abroad. There is
no proof whatever that she was not a native Egyptian, and the mummies of
her parents, Iuaa and Tuaa, are purely Egyptian in facial type. It
seems undoubted that the Aten cult was a development of pure Egyptian
religious thought.

At first Akhunaten tried to establish his religion at Thebes alongside
that of Amen and his attendant pantheon. He seems to have built a temple
to the Aten there, and we see that his courtiers began to make tombs for
themselves in the new realistic style of sculptural art, which the king,
heretical in art as in religion, had introduced. The tomb of Barnes at
Shêkh ‘Abd el-Kûrna has on one side of the door a representation of
the king in the old regular style, and on the other side one in the new
realistic style, which depicts him in all the native ugliness in which
this strange truth-loving man seems to have positively gloried. We
find, too, that he caused a temple to the Aten to be erected in far-away
Napata, the capital of Nubia, by Jebel Barkal in the Sudan. The facts
as to the Theban and Napata temples have been pointed out by Prof.
Breasted, of Chicago.

But the opposition of the Theban priesthood was too strong. Akhunaten
shook the dust of the capital off his feet and retired to the isolated
city of Akhet-aten, “the Glory of the Disk,” at the modern Tell
el-Amarna, where he could philosophize in peace, while his kingdom was
left to take care of itself. He and his wife Nefret-iti, who seems to
have been a faithful sharer of his views, reigned over a select court
of Aten-worship-ping nobles, priests, and artists. The artists had under
Akhunaten an unrivalled opportunity for development, of which they had
already begun to take considerable advantage before the end of his reign
and the restoration of the old order of ideas. Their style takes on
itself an almost bizarre freedom, which reminds us strongly of the
similar characteristic in Mycenaean art. There is a strange little
relief in the Berlin Museum of the king standing cross-legged, leaning
on a staff, and languidly smelling a flower, while the queen stands
by with her garments blown about by the wind. The artistic monarch’s
graceful attitude is probably a faithful transcript of a characteristic
pose.

We see from this what an Egyptian artist could do when his shackles were
removed, but unluckily Egypt never produced another king who was at the
same time an original genius, an artist, and a thinker. When Akhunaten
died, the Egyptian artists’ shackles were riveted tighter than ever.
The reaction was strong. The kingdom had fallen into anarchy, and the
foreign empire which his predecessors had built up had practically
been thrown to the winds by Akhunaten. The whole is an example of the
confusion and disorganization which ensue when a philosopher rules. Not
long after the heretic’s death the old religion was fully restored, the
cult of the disk was blotted out, and the Egyptians returned joyfully
to the worship of their myriad deities. Akhunaten’s ideals were too high
for them. The débris of the foreign empire was, as usual in such
cases, put together again, and customary law and order restored by
the conservative reactionaries who succeeded him. Henceforth Egyptian
civilization runs an uninspired and undeveloping course till the days
of the Saïtes and the Ptolemies. This point in the history of Egypt,
therefore, forms a convenient stopping-place at which to pause, while
we turn once more to Western Asia, and ascertain to what extent recent
excavations and research have thrown new light upon the problems
connected with the rise and history of the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian
Empires.

[Illustration: 387.jpg]




CHAPTER VIII--THE ASSYRIAN AND NEO-BABYLONIAN EMPIRES IN THE LIGHT OF
RECENT RESEARCH


The early history of Assyria has long been a subject on which historians
were obliged to trust largely to conjecture, in their attempts to
reconstruct the stages by which its early rulers obtained their
independence and laid the foundations of the mighty empire over which
their successors ruled. That the land was colonized from Babylonia and
was at first ruled as a dependency of the southern kingdom have long
been regarded as established facts, but until recently little was known
of its early rulers and governors, and still less of the condition of
the country and its capital during the early periods of their existence.
Since the excavations carried out by the British Museum at Kala
Sherghat, on the western bank of the Tigris, it has been known that
the mounds at that spot mark the site of the city of Ashur, the first
capital of the Assyrians, and the monuments and records recovered
during those excavations have hitherto formed our principal source of
information for the early history of the country.* Some of the oldest
records found in the course of these excavations were short votive texts
inscribed by rulers who bore the title of _ishshakku_, corresponding to
the Sumerian and early Babylonian title of patesi, and with some such
meaning as “viceroy.” It was rightly conjectured from the title which
they bore that these early rulers owed allegiance to the kings of
Babylon and were their nominees, or at any rate their tributaries. The
names of a few of these early viceroys were recovered from their votive
inscriptions and from notices in later historical texts, but it was
obvious that our knowledge of early Assyrian history would remain very
fragmentary until systematic excavations in Assyria were resumed. Three
years ago (1902) the British Museum resumed excavations at Kuyunjik, the
site of Nineveh. The work was begun and carried out under the direction
of Mr. L. W. King, but since last summer has been continued by Mr. R. C.
Thompson. Last year, too, excavations were reopened at Sherghat by
the Deutsch-Orient Ge-sellschaft, at first under the direction of Dr.
Koldewey, and afterwards under that of Dr. Andrae, by whom they are
at present being carried on. This renewed activity on the sites of the
ancient cities of Assyria is already producing results of considerable
interest, and the veil which has so long concealed the earlier periods
in the history of that country is being lifted.

     * For the texts and translations of these documents, see
     Budge and King, Annals of the Kings of Assyria, pp. iff.

Shortly before these excavations in Assyria were set on foot an
indication was obtained from an early Babylonian text that the history
of Assyria as a dependent state or province of Babylon must be pushed
back to a far more remote period than had hitherto been supposed. In one
of Hammurabi’s letters to Sin-idinnam, governor of the city of Larsam,
to which reference has already been made, directions are given for
the despatch to the king of “two hundred and forty men of ‘the King’s
Company’ under the command of Nannar-iddina... who have left the country
of Ashur and the district of Shitullum.” From this most interesting
reference it followed that the country to the north of Babylonia was
known as Assyria at the time of the kings of the First Dynasty of
Babylon, and the fact that Babylonian troops were stationed there
by Hammurabi proved that the country formed an integral part of the
Babylonian empire.

These conclusions were soon after strikingly confirmed by two passages
in the introductory sections of Hammurabi’s code of laws which was
discovered at Susa. Here Hammurabi records that he “restored his (i.e.
the god Ashur’s) protecting image unto the city of Ashur,” and a few
lines farther on he describes himself as the king “who hath made
the names of Ishtar glorious in the city of Nineveh in the temple of
E-mish-mish.” That Ashur should be referred to at this period is what we
might expect, inasmuch as it was known to have been the earliest capital
of Assyria; more striking is the reference to Nineveh, proving as it
does that it was a flourishing city in Hammurabi’s time and that the
temple of Ishtar there had already been long established. It is true
that Gudea, the Sumerian patesi of Shirpurla, records that he rebuilt
the temple of the goddess Ninni (Ishtar) at a place called Nina. Now
Nina may very probably be identified with Nineveh, but many writers have
taken it to be a place in Southern Babylonia and possibly a district of
Shirpurla itself. No such uncertainty attaches to Hammurabi’s reference
to Nineveh, which is undoubtedly the Assyrian city of that name.
Although no account has yet been published of the recent excavations
carried out at Nineveh by the British Museum, they fully corroborate the
inference drawn with regard to the great age of the city. The series of
trenches which were cut deep into the lower strata of Kuyunjik revealed
numerous traces of very early habitations on the mound.

Neither in Hammurabi’s letters, nor upon the stele inscribed with his
code of laws, is any reference made to the contemporary governor or
ruler of Assyria, but on a contract tablet preserved in the Pennsylvania
Museum a name has been recovered which will probably be identified
with that of the ruler of Assyria in Hammurabi’s reign. In legal and
commercial documents of the period of the First Dynasty of Babylon the
contracting parties frequently swore by the names of two gods (usually
Shamash and Marduk) and also that of the reigning king. Now it has been
found by Dr. Banke that on this document in the Pennsylvania Museum the
contracting parties swear by the name of Hammurabi and also by that of
Shamshi-Adad. As only gods and kings are mentioned in the oath formulas
of this period, it follows that Shamshi-Adad was a king, or at any rate
a patesi or ishshakku. Now from its form the name Shamshi-Adad must
be that of an Assyrian, not that of a Babylonian, and, since he is
associated in the oath formula with Hammurabi, it is legitimate to
conclude that he governed Assyria in the time of Hammurabi as a
dependency of Babylon. An early Assyrian ishshakku of this name, who was
the son of Ishme-Dagan, is mentioned by Tiglath-Pileser I, but he cannot
be identified with the ruler of the time of Hammurabi, since,
according to Tiglath-Pileser, he ruled too late, about 1800 B.C.
A brick-inscription of another Shamshi-Adad, however, the son of
Igur-kapkapu, is preserved in the British Museum, and it is probable
that we may identify him with Hammurabi’s Assyrian viceroy. Erishum and
his son Ikunum, whose inscriptions are also preserved in the British
Museum, should certainly be assigned to an early period of Assyrian
history.

The recent excavations at Sherghat are already yielding the names
of other early Assyrian viceroys, and, although the texts of the
inscriptions in which their names occur have not yet been published, we
may briefly enumerate the more important of the discoveries that have
been made. Last year a small cone or cylinder was found which, though
it bears only a few lines of inscription, restores the names of no less
than seven early Assyrian viceroys whose existence was not previously
known. The cone was inscribed by Ashir-rîm-nishêshu, who gives his own
genealogy and records the restoration of the wall of the city of Ashur,
which he states had been rebuilt by certain of his predecessors on
the throne. The principal portion of the inscription reads as
follows: “Ashir-rîm-nishêshu, the viceroy of the god Ashir, the son of
Ashir-nirari, the viceroy of the god Ashir, the son of Ashir-rabi, the
viceroy. The city wall which Kikia, Ikunum, Shar-kenkate-Ashir, and
Ashir-nirari, the son of Ishme-Dagan, my forefathers, had built, was
fallen, and for the preservation of my life... I rebuilt it.” Perhaps no
inscription has yet been recovered in either Assyria or Babylonia which
contained so much new information packed into so small a space. Of the
names of the early viceroys mentioned in it only one was previously
known, i.e. the name of Ikunum, the son of Erishum, is found in a late
copy of a votive text preserved in the British Museum. Thus from these
few lines the names of three rulers in direct succession have been
recovered, viz., Ashir-rabi, Ashir-nirari, and Ashur-rîm-nishêshu, and
also those of four earlier rulers, viz., Kikia, Shar-kenkate-Ashir,
Ishme-Dagan, and his son Ashir-nirari. Another interesting point about
the inscription is the spelling of the name of the national god of the
Assyrians. In the later periods it is always written _Ashur_, but at
this early time we see that the second vowel is changed and that at
first the name was written _Ashir_, a form that was already known
from the Cappadocian cuneiform inscriptions. The form Ashir is a good
participial construction and signifies “the Beneficent,” “the Merciful
One.”

Another interesting find, which was also made last year, consists of
four stone tablets, each engraved with the same building-inscription
of Shalmaneser I, a king who reigned over Assyria about 1300 B.C. In
recording his rebuilding of E-kharsag-kurkura, the temple of the god
Ashur in the city of Ashur, he gives a brief summary of the temple’s
history with details as to the length of time which elapsed between
the different periods during which it had been previously restored. The
temple was burned in Shalmaneser’s time, and, when recording this fact
and the putting out of the fire, he summarizes the temple’s history in a
long parenthesis, as will be seen from the following translation of the
extract: “When E-kharsag-kurkura, the temple of Ashur, my lord, which
Ushpia (variant _Aushpia_), the priest of Ashur, my forefather, had
built aforetime,--and it fell into decay and Erishu, my forefather,
the priest of Ashur, rebuilt it; 159 years passed by after the reign of
Erishu, and that temple fell into decay, and Shamshi-Adad, the priest
of Ashur, rebuilt it; (during) 580 years that temple which Shamshi-Adad,
the priest of Ashur, had built, grew hoary and old--(when) fire broke
out in the midst thereof..., at that time I drenched that temple (with
water) in (all) its circuit.”

From this extract it will be seen that Shalmaneser gives us, in Ushpia
or Aushpia, the name of a very early Assyrian viceroy, who in his belief
was the founder of the great temple of the god Ashur. He also tells us
that 159 years separated Erishu from a viceroy named Shamshi-Adad, and
that 580 years separated Shamshi-Adad from his own time. When these
inscriptions were first found they were hailed with considerable
satisfaction by historians, as they gave what seemed to be valuable
information for settling the chronology of the early patesis. But
confidence in the accuracy of Shalmaneser’s reckoning was somewhat
shaken a few months afterwards by the discovery of a prism of
Esarhaddon, who gave in it a history of the same temple, but ascribed
totally different figures for the periods separating the reigns
of Erishu and Shamshi-Adad, and the temple’s destruction by fire.
Esarhaddon agrees with Shalmaneser in ascribing the founding of the
temple to Ushpia, but he states that only 126 years (instead of 159
years) separated Erishu (whom he spells Irishu), the son of Ilu-shumma,
from Shamshi-Adad, the son of Bêl-kabi; and he adds that 434 years
(instead of 580 years) elapsed between Shamshi-Adad’s restoration of the
temple and the time when it was burned down. As Shalmaneser I lived over
six hundred years earlier than Esarhaddon, he was obviously in a better
position to ascertain the periods at which the events recorded took
place, but the discrepancy between the figures he gives and those of
Esarhaddon is disconcerting. It shows that Assyrian scribes could make
bad mistakes in their reckoning, and it serves to cast discredit on the
absolute accuracy of the chronological notices contained in other
late Assyrian inscriptions. So far from helping to settle the unsolved
problems of Assyrian chronology, these two recent finds at Sherghat
have introduced fresh confusion, and Assyrian chronology for the earlier
periods is once more cast into the melting pot.

In addition to the recovery of the names of hitherto unknown early
rulers of Assyria, the recent excavations at Sherghat have enabled us to
ascertain the true reading of the name of Shalmaneser I’s grandfather,
who reigned a considerable time after Assyria had gained her
independence. The name of this king has hitherto been read as Pudi-ilu,
but it is now shown that the signs composing the first part of the name
are not to be taken phonetically, but as ideographs, the true reading of
the name being Arik-dên-ilu, the signification of which is “Long
(i.e. far-reaching) is the judgment of God.” Arik-dên-ilu was a great
conqueror, as were his immediate descendants, all of whom extended the
territory of Assyria. By strengthening the country and increasing her
resources they enabled Arik-dên-ilu ‘s great-grandson, Tukulti-Ninib I,
to achieve the conquest of Babylon itself. Concerning Tukulti-Ninib’s
reign and achievements an interesting inscription has recently been
discovered. This is now preserved in the British Museum, and before
describing it we may briefly refer to another phase of the excavations
at Sherghat.

[Illustration: 396.jpg Stone Object Bearing a Votive Inscription of
Arik-den-ilu.]

     An early independent King of Assyria, who reigned about B.C.
     1350. Photograph by Messrs. Mansell & Co.

The mounds of Sherghat rise a considerable height above the level of
the plain, and are to a great extent of natural and not of artificial
formation. In fact, the existence of a group of high natural mounds at
this point on the bank of the Tigris must have led to its selection
by the early Assyrians as the site on which to build their first
stronghold. The mounds were already so high, from their natural
formation, that there was no need for the later Assyrian kings
to increase their height artificially (as they raised the chief
palace-mound at Nineveh), and the remains of the Assyrian buildings of
the early period are thus only covered by a few feet of débris and not
by masses of unburnt brick and artificially piled up soil. This fact
has considerably facilitated the systematic uncovering of the principal
mound that is now being carried out by Dr. Andrae.

[Illustration: 397.jpg ENTRANCE INTO ONE OF THE GALLERIES OR TUNNELS CUT
INTO THE PRINCIPAL MOUND AT SHERGHAT.]

Work has hitherto been confined to the northwest corner of the mound
around the ziggurat, or temple tower, and already considerable traces of
Assyrian buildings have been laid bare in this portion of the site. The
city wall on the northern side has been uncovered, as well as quays with
steps leading down to the water along the river front. Part of the
great temple of the god Ashur has been excavated, though a considerable
portion of it must be still covered by the modern Turkish fort at the
extreme northern point of the mounds; also part of a palace erected
by Ashur-nasir-pal has been identified. In fact, the work at Sherghat
promises to add considerably to our knowledge of ancient Assyrian
architecture.

The inscription of Tukulti-Ninib I, which was referred to above as
having been recently acquired by the trustees of the British Museum,
affords valuable information for the reconstruction of the history of
Assyria during the first half of the thirteenth century B.C.* It is seen
from the facts summarized that for our knowledge of the earlier
history of the country we have to depend to a large extent on short
brick-inscriptions and votive texts supplemented by historical
references in inscriptions of the later period. The only historical
inscription of any length belonging to the early Assyrian period,
which had been published up to a year ago, was the famous memorial slab
containing an inscription of Adad-nirari I, which was acquired by the
late Mr. George Smith some thirty years ago. Although purchased in
Mosul, the slab had been found by the natives in the mounds at Sherghat,
for the text engraved upon it in archaic Assyrian characters records the
restoration of a part of the temple of the god Ashur in the ancient city
of Ashur, the first capital of the Assyrians, now marked by the
mounds of Sherghat, which have already been described. The object of
Adad-nirari in causing the memorial slab to be inscribed was to record
the restoration of the portion of the temple which he had rebuilt,
but the most important part of the inscription was contained in the
introductory phrases with which the text opens. They recorded
the conquests achieved not only by Adad-nirari but by his father
Arik-dên-ilu, his grandfather Bél-nirari, and his great-grandfather
Ashur-uballit. They thus enabled the historian to trace the gradual
extension and consolidation of the Assyrian empire during a critical
period in its early history.

     * For the text and translation of the inscription, see King,
     Studies it Eastern History, i (1904).

The recently recovered memorial slab of Tukulti-Ninib I is similar to
that of his grandfather Adad-nirari I, and ranks in importance with it
for the light it throws on the early struggles of Assyria. Tukulti-Ninib
‘s slab, like that of Adad-nirari, was a foundation memorial intended to
record certain building operations carried out by order of the king.
The building so commemorated was not the restoration of a portion of
a temple, but the founding of a new city, in which the king erected
no less than eight temples dedicated to various deities, while he also
records that he built a palace therein for his own habitation, that he
protected the city by a strongly fortified wall, and that he cut a canal
from the Tigris by which he ensured a continuous supply of fresh water.
These were the facts which the memorial was primarily intended to
record, but, like the text of Adad-nirari I, the most interesting events
for the historian are those referred to in the introductory portions of
the inscription. Before giving details concerning the founding of the
new city, named Kar-Tukulti-Mnib, “the Fortress of Tukulti-Mnib,”
 the king supplies an account of the military expeditions which he
had conducted during the course of his reign up to the time when the
foundation memorial was inscribed. These introductory paragraphs record
how the king gradually conquered the peoples to the north and northeast
of Assyria, and how he finally undertook a successful campaign against
Babylon, during which he captured the city and completely subjugated
both Northern and Southern Babylonia. Tukulti-Mnib’s reign thus marks an
epoch in the history of his country.

We have already seen how, during the early ages of her history, Assyria
had been merely a subject province of the Babylonian empire. Her rulers
had been viceroys owing allegiance to their overlords in Babylon,
under whose orders they administered the country, while garrisons of
Babylonian soldiers, and troops commanded by Babylonian officers, served
to keep the country in a state of subjection. Gradually, however, the
country began to feel her feet and long for independence. The conquest
of Babylon by the kings of the Country of the Sea afforded her the
opportunity of throwing off the Babylonian yoke. In the fifteenth
century the Assyrian kings were powerful enough to have independent
relations with the kings of Egypt, and, during the two centuries which
preceded Tukulti-Mnib’s reign.

Assyria’s relations with Babylon were the cause of constant friction due
to the northern kingdom’s growth in power and influence. The frontier
between the two countries was constantly in dispute, and, though
sometimes rectified by treaty, the claims of Assyria often led to war
between the two countries. The general result of these conflicts was
that Assyria gradually extended her authority farther southwards, and
encroached upon territory which had previously been Babylonian. The
successes gained by Ashur-uballit, Bêl-nirari, and Adad-nirari I against
the contemporary Babylonian kings had all resulted in the cession of
fresh territory to Assyria and in an increase of her international
importance. Up to the time of Tukulti-Mnib no Assyrian king had actually
seated himself upon the Babylonian throne. This feat was achieved by
Tukulti-Mnib, and his reign thus marks an important step in the gradual
advance of Assyria to the position which she later occupied as the
predominant power in Western Asia.

Before undertaking his campaign against Babylon, Tukulti-Mnib secured
himself against attack from other quarters, and his newly discovered
memorial inscription supplies considerable information concerning the
steps he took to achieve this object. In his inscription the king does
not number his military expeditions, and, with the exception of the
first one, he does not state the period of his reign in which they
were undertaken. The results of his campaigns are summarized in four
paragraphs of the text, and it is probable that they are not described
in chronological order, but are arranged rather according to the
geographical position of the districts which he invaded and subdued.
Tukulti-Ninib records that his first campaign took place at the
beginning of his sovereignty, in the first year of his reign, and it was
directed against the tribes and peoples inhabiting the territory on the
east of Assyria. Of the tribes which he overran and conquered on this
occasion the most important was the Kuti, who probably dwelt in the
districts to the east of the Lower Zâb. They were a turbulent race and
they had already been conquered by Arik-dên-ilu and Adad-nirari I, but
on neither occasion had they been completely subdued, and they had soon
regained their independence. Their subjugation by Tukulti-Ninib was
a necessary preliminary to any conquest in the south, and we can well
understand why it was undertaken by the king at the beginning of his
reign. Other conquests which were also made in the same region were the
Ukumanî and the lands of Elkhu-nia, Sharnida, and Mekhri, mountainous
districts which probably lay to the north of the Lower Zâb. The country
of Mekhri took its name from the mekhru-tree, a kind of pine or fir,
which grew there in abundance upon the mountainsides, and was highly
esteemed by the Assyrian kings as affording excellent wood for building
purposes. At a later period Ashur-nasir-pal invaded the country in the
course of his campaigns and brought back beams of mekhru-wood, which he
used in the construction of the temple dedicated to the goddess Ishtar
in Nineveh.

The second group of tribes and districts enumerated by Tukulti-Ninib as
having been subdued in his early years, before his conquest of Babylon,
all lay probably to the northwest of Assyria. The most powerful among
these peoples were the Shubari, who, like the Kutî on the eastern
border of Assyria, had already been conquered by Adad-nirari I, but had
regained their independence and were once more threatening the border on
this side. The third group of his conquests consisted of the districts
ruled over by forty kings of the lands of Na’iri, which was a general
term for the mountainous districts to the north of Assyria, including
territory to the west of Lake Van and extending eastwards to the
districts around Lake Urmi. The forty kings in this region whom
Tukulti-Ninib boasts of having subdued were little more than chieftains
of the mountain tribes, each one possessing authority over a few
villages scattered among the hills and valleys. But the men of Na’iri
were a warlike and hardy race, and, if left long in undisturbed
possession of their native fastnesses, they were tempted to make raids
into the fertile plains of Assyria. It was therefore only politic for
Tukulti-Ninib to traverse their country with fire and sword, and, by
exacting heavy tribute, to keep the fear of Assyrian power before their
eyes. From the king’s records we thus learn that he subdued and crippled
the semi-independent races living on his borders to the north, to the
northwest, and to the east. On the west was the desert, from which
region he need fear no organized attack when he concentrated his army
elsewhere, for his permanent garrisons were strong enough to repel and
punish any incursion of nomadic tribes. He was thus in a position to try
conclusions with his hereditary foe in the south, without any fear of
leaving his land open to invasion in his absence.

The campaign against Babylon was the most important one undertaken by
Tukulti-Ninib, and its successful issue was the crowning point of his
military career. The king relates that the great gods Ashur, Bel, and
Shamash, and the goddess Ishtar, the queen of heaven and earth, marched
at the head of his warriors when he set out upon the expedition. After
crossing the border and penetrating into Babylonian territory he seems
to have had some difficulty in forcing Bitiliashu, the Kassite king who
then occupied the throne of Babylon, to a decisive engagement. But by
a skilful disposition of his forces he succeeded in hemming him in, so
that the Babylonian army was compelled to engage in a pitched battle.
The result of the fighting was a complete victory for the Assyrian arms.
Many of the Babylonian warriors fell fighting, and Bitiliashu himself
was captured by the Assyrian soldiers in the midst of the battle.
Tukulti-Ninib boasts that he trampled his lordly neck beneath his feet,
and on his return to Assyria he carried his captive back in fetters to
present him with the spoils of the campaign before Ashur, the national
god of the Assyrians.

Before returning to Assyria, however, Tukulti-Ninib marched with his
army throughout the length and breadth of Babylonia, and achieved
the subjugation of the whole of the Sumer and Akkad. He destroyed the
fortifications of Babylon to ensure that they should not again be used
against himself, and all the inhabitants who did not at once submit to
his decrees he put co the sword. He then appointed his own officers
to rule the country and established his own system of administration,
adding to his previous title of “King of Assyria,” those of “King of
Karduniash (i. e. Babylonia)” and “King of Sumer and Akkad.” It was
probably from this period that he also adopted the title of “King of the
Poor Quarters of the World.” As a mark of the complete subjugation of
their ancient foe, Tukulti-Ninib and his army carried back with them
to Assyria not only the captive Babylonian king, but also the statue of
Marduk, the national god of Babylon. This they removed from B-sagila,
his sumptuous temple in Babylon, and they looted the sacred treasures
from the treasure-chambers, and carried them off together with the spoil
of the city.

Tukulti-Ninib no doubt left a sufficient proportion of his army in
Babylon to garrison the city and support the governors and officials
into whose charge he committed the administration of the land, but he
himself returned to Assyria with the rich spoil of the campaign, and
it was probably as a use for this large increase of wealth and material
that he decided to found another city which should bear his own name and
perpetuate it for future ages. The king records that he undertook this
task at the bidding of Bel (i.e. the god Ashur), who commanded that he
should found a new city and build a dwelling-place for him therein.
In accordance with the desire of Ashur and the gods, which was thus
conveyed to him, the king founded the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninib, and
he erected therein temples dedicated not only to Ashur, but also to the
gods Adad, and Sha-mash, and Ninib, and Nusku, and Nergal, and Imina-bi,
and the goddess Ishtar. The spoils from Babylon and the temple treasures
from E-sagila were doubtless used for the decoration of these temples
and the adornment of their shrines, and the king endowed the temples and
appointed regular offerings, which he ordained should be their property
for ever. He also built a sumptuous palace for his own abode when he
stayed in the city, which he constructed on a mound or terrace of earth,
faced with brick, and piled high above the level of the city. Finally,
he completed its fortification by the erection of a massive wall around
it, and the completion of this wall was the occasion on which his
memorial tablet was inscribed.

The memorial tablet was buried and bricked up within the actual
structure of the wall, in order that in future ages it might be read by
those who found it, and so it might preserve his name and fame. After
finishing the account of his building operations in the new city and
recording the completion of the city wall from its foundation to its
coping stone, the king makes an appeal to any future ruler who should
find it, in the following words: “In the days that are to come, when
this wall shall have grown old and shall have fallen into ruins, may
a future prince repair the damaged parts thereof, and may he anoint my
memorial tablet with oil, and may he offer sacrifices and restore
it unto its place, and then Ashur will hearken unto his prayers. But
whosoever shall destroy this wall, or shall remove my memorial tablet or
my name that is inscribed thereon, or shall leave Kar-Tukulti-Ninib, the
city of my dominion, desolate, or shall destroy it, may the lord Ashur
overthrow his kingdom, and may he break his weapons, and may he cause
his warriors to be defeated, and may he diminish his boundaries, and may
he ordain that his rule shall be cut off, and on his days may he bring
sorrow, and his years may he make evil, and may he blot out his name and
his seed from the land!”

By such blessings and curses Tukulti-Ninib hoped to ensure the
preservation of his name and the rebuilding of his city, should it at
any time be neglected and fall into decay. Curiously enough, it was in
this very city that Tukulti-Ninib met his own fate less than seven years
after he had founded it. At that time one of his own sons, who bore the
name of Ashur-nasir-pal, conspired against his father and stirred up the
nobles to revolt. The insurrection was arranged when Tukulti-Ninib was
absent from his capital and staying in Kar-Tukulti-Ninib, where he was
probably protected by only a small bodyguard, the bulk of his veteran
warriors remaining behind in garrison at Ashur. The insurgent nobles,
headed by Ashur-nasir-pal, fell upon the king without warning when
he was passing through the city without any suspicion of risk from a
treacherous attack. The king defended himself and sought refuge in a
neighbouring house, but the conspirators surrounded the building and,
having forced an entrance, slew him with the sword. Thus Tukulti-Ninib
perished in the city he had built and beautified with the spoils of his
campaigns, where he had looked forward to passing a peaceful and secure
old age. Of the fate of the city itself we know little except that its
site is marked to-day by a few mounds which rise slightly above the
level of the surrounding desert. The king’s memorial tablet only has
survived. For some 3,200 years it rested undisturbed in the foundations
of the wall of unburnt brick, where it was buried by Tukulti-Ninib on
the completion of the city wall.

[Illustration: 408.jpg Stone Tablet. Bearing an inscription of
Tukulti-Ninib I]

     King of Assyria, about B. C. 1275.

Thence it was removed by the hands of modern Arabs, and it is now
preserved in the British Museum, where the characters of the inscription
may be seen to be as sharp and uninjured as on the day when the Assyrian
graver inscribed them by order of the king.

In the account of his first campaign, which is preserved upon
the memorial tablet, it is stated that the peoples conquered by
Tukulti-Ninib brought their yearly tribute to the city of Ashur. This
fact is of considerable interest, for it proves that Tukulti-Ninib
restored the capital of Assyria to the city of Ashur, removing it from
Calah, whither it had been transferred by his father Shalmaneser I. The
city of Calah had been founded and built by Shalmaneser I in the same
way that his son Tukulti-Ninib built the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninib, and
the building of both cities is striking evidence of the rapid growth
of Assyria and her need of expansion around fresh centres prepared for
administration and defence. The shifting of the Assyrian capital to
Calah by Shalmaneser I was also due to the extension of Assyrian power
in the north, in consequence of which there was need of having the
capital nearer the centre of the country so enlarged. Ashur’s recovery
of her old position under Tukulti-Ninib I was only a temporary check to
this movement northwards, and, so long as Babylon remained a conquered
province of the Assyrian empire, obviously the need for a capital
farther north than Ashur would not have been pressing.

[Illustration 409.jpg THE ZIGGURAT, OR TEMPLE TOWER, OF THE ASSYRIAN
CITY OF CALAH.]

But with Tukulti-Ninib’s death Babylon regained her independence and
freed herself from Assyrian control, and the centre of the northern
kingdom was once more subject to the influences which eventually
resulted in the permanent transference of her capital to Nineveh. To the
comparative neglect into which Ashur and Calah consequently fell, we
may probably trace the extensive remains of buildings belonging to the
earlier periods of Assyrian history which have been recovered and still
remain to be found, in the mounds that mark their sites.

We have given some account of the results already achieved from the
excavations carried out during the last two years at Sherghat, the site
of the city of Ashur. That much remains to be done on the site of Calah,
the other early capital of Assyria, is evident from even a cursory
examination of the present condition of the mounds that mark the
location of the city. These mounds are now known by the name of Nimrûd
and are situated on the left or eastern bank of the Tigris, a short
distance above the point at which it is joined by the stream of the
Upper Zâb, and the great mound which still covers the remains of the
ziggurat, or temple tower, can be seen from a considerable distance
across the plain. During the excavations formerly carried out here for
the British Museum, remains of palaces were recovered which had been
built or restored by Shal-maneser I, Ashur-nasir-pal, Shalmaneser II,
Tiglath-pileser III, Sargon, Esarhaddon, and Ashur-etil-ilâni. After the
conclusion of the diggings and the removal of many of the sculptures to
England, the site was covered again with earth, in order to protect the
remains of Assyrian buildings which were left in place. Since that time
the soil has sunk and been washed away by the rains so that many of the
larger sculptures are now protruding above the soil, an example of which
is seen in the two winged bulls in the palace of Ashur-nasir-pal. It
is improbable that the mounds of Nimrûd will yield such rich results
as Sherghat, but the site would probably well repay prolonged and
systematic excavation.

We have hitherto summarized and described the principal facts,
with regard to the early history of Babylonia and Assyria and the
neighbouring countries, which have been obtained from the excavations
conducted recently on the sites of ancient cities. From the actual
remains of the buildings that have been unearthed we have secured
information with regard to the temples and palaces of ancient rulers and
the plans on which they were designed. Erom the objects of daily life
and of religious use which have been recovered, such as weapons of
bronze and iron, and vessels of metal, stone, and clay, it is possible
for the archaeologist to draw conclusions with regard to the customs of
these early peoples; while from a study of their style and workmanship
and of such examples of their sculpture as have been brought to light,
he may determine the stage of artistic development at which they had
arrived. The clay tablets and stone monuments that have been recovered
reveal the family life of the people, their commercial undertakings,
their system of legislation and land tenure, their epistolary
correspondence, and the administration under which they lived, while the
royal inscriptions and foundation-memorials throw light on the religious
and historical events of the period in which they were inscribed.
Information on all these points has been acquired as the result of
excavation, and is based on the discoveries in the ruins of early cities
which have remained buried beneath the soil for some thousands of years.
But for the history of Assyria and of the other nations in the north
there is still another source of information to which reference must now
be made.

The kings of Assyria were not content with recording their achievements
on the walls of their buildings, on stelae set up in their palaces and
temples, on their tablets of annals preserved in their archive-chambers,
and on their cylinders and foundation-memorials concealed within the
actual structure of the buildings themselves. They have also left
records graven in the living rock, and these have never been buried,
but have been exposed to wind and weather from the moment they
were engraved. Records of irrigation works and military operations
successfully undertaken by Assyrian kings remain to this day on the
face of the mountains to the north and east of Assyria. The kings of
one great mountain race that had its capital at Van borrowed from the
Assyrians this method of recording their achievements, and, adopting the
Assyrian character, have left numerous rock-inscriptions in their own
language in the mountains of Armenia and Kurdistan. In some instances
the action of rain and frost has nearly if not quite obliterated the
record, and a few have been defaced by the hand of man. But as the
majority are engraved in panels cut on the sheer face of the rock, and
are inaccessible except by means of ropes and tackle, they have escaped
mutilation. The photograph reproduced will serve to show the means that
must be adopted for reaching such rock-inscriptions in order to examine
or copy them.

[Illustration: 413.jpg WORK IN PROGRESS ON ONE OF THE ROCK-INSCRIPTIONS
OF SENNACHERIB]

     In The Gorge Of The River Gomel, Near Bavian.

The inscription shown in the photograph is one of those cut by
Sennacherib in the gorge near Bavian, through which the river Gomel
flows, and can be reached only by climbing down ropes fixed to the top
of the cliff. The choice of such positions by the kings who caused the
inscriptions to be engraved was dictated by the desire to render it
difficult to destroy them, but it has also had the effect of delaying to
some extent their copying and decipherment by modern workers.

[Illustration: 414.jpg THE PRINCIPAL ROCK SCULPTURES IN THE GORGE OF THE
GOMEL]

     Near Bavian In Assyria.

Considerable progress, however, has recently been made in identifying
and copying these texts, and we may here give a short account of what
has been done and of the information furnished by the inscriptions that
have been examined.

Recently considerable additions have been made to our knowledge of the
ancient empire of Van and of its relation to the later kings of Assyria
by the labours of Prof Lehmann and Dr. Belck on the inscriptions which
the kings of that period caused to be engraved upon the rocks among the
mountains of Armenia.

[Illustration: 415.jpg THE ROCK AND CITADEL OF VAN.]

The flat roofs of the houses of the city of Van may be seen to the left
of the photograph nestling below the rock.

The centre and capital of this empire was the ancient city which stood
on the site of the modern town of Van at the southwest corner of the
lake which bears the same name. The city was built at the foot of a
natural rock which rises precipitously from the plain, and must have
formed an impregnable stronghold against the attack of the foe.

In this citadel at the present day remain the ancient galleries and
staircases and chambers which were cut in the living rock by the kings
who made it their fortress, and their inscriptions, engraved upon the
face of the rock on specially prepared and polished surfaces, enable us
to reconstruct in some degree the history of that ancient empire. From
time to time there have been found and copied other similar texts, which
are cut on the mountainsides or on the massive stones which formed part
of the construction of their buildings and fortifications. A complete
collection of these texts, together with translations, will shortly be
published by Prof. Lehmann. Meanwhile, this scholar has discussed and
summarized the results to be obtained from much of his material, and
we are thus already enabled to sketch the principal achievements of the
rulers of this mountain race, who were constantly at war with the later
kings of Assyria, and for two centuries at least disputed her claim to
supremacy in this portion of Western Asia.

The country occupied by this ancient people of Van was the great
table-land which now forms Armenia. The people themselves cannot
be connected with the Armenians, for their language presents no
characteristics of those of the Indo-European family, and it is equally
certain that they are not to be traced to a Semitic origin. It is true
that they employed the Assyrian method of writing their inscriptions,
and their art differs only in minor points from that of the Assyrians,
but in both instances this similarity of culture was directly borrowed
at a time when the less civilized race, having its centre at Van, came
into direct contact with the Assyrians.

[Illustration: 417.jpg ANCIENT FLIGHT OF STEPS AND GALLERY ON THE FACE
OF THE ROCK-CITADEL OF VAN.

The exact date at which this influence began to be exerted is not
certain, but we have records of immediate relations with Assyria in the
second half of the ninth century before Christ. The district inhabited
by the Vannic people was known to the Assyrians by the name of Urartu,
and although the inscriptions of the earlier Assyrian kings do not
record expeditions against that country, they frequently make mention of
campaigns against princes and petty rulers of the land of Na’iri. They
must therefore for long have exercised an indirect, if not a direct,
influence on the peoples and tribes which lay more to the north.

The earliest evidence of direct contact between the Assyrians and the
land of Urartu which we at present possess dates from the reign of
Ashur-nasir-pal, and in the reign of his son Shalmaneser II three
expeditions were undertaken against the people of Van. The name of the
king of Urartu at this time was Arame, and his capital city, Arzasku,
probably lay to the north of Lake Van. On all three occasions the
Assyrians were victorious, forcing Arame to abandon his capital
and capturing his cities as far as the sources of the Euphrates.
Subsequently, in the year 833 B.C., Shalmaneser II made another attack
upon the country, which at that time was under the sway of Sarduris I.
Under this monarch the citadel of Van became the great stronghold of the
people of Urartu, for he added to the natural strength of the position
by the construction of walls built between the rock of Van and the
harbour. The massive blocks of stone of which his fortifications
were composed are standing at the present day, and they bear eloquent
testimony to the energy with which this monarch devoted himself to the
task of rendering his new citadel impregnable. The fortification and
strengthening of Van and its citadel was carried on during the reigns of
his direct successors and descendants, Ispui-nis, Menuas, and Argistis
I, so that when Tiglath-pile-ser III brought fire and sword into the
country and laid siege to Van in the reign of Sarduris II, he could not
capture the citadel.

[Illustration: 419.jpg PART OF THE ANCIENT FORTIFICATIONS OF THE CITY OF
VAN, BETWEEN THE CITADEL AND THE LAKE.]

It was not difficult for the Assyrian king to assault and capture the
city itself, which lay at the foot of the citadel as it does at the
present day, but the latter, within the fortifications of which Sarduris
and his garrison withdrew, proved itself able to withstand the Assyrian
attack. The expedition of Tiglath-pileser III did not succeed in
crushing the Vannic empire, for Rusas I, the son and successor of
Sarduris II, allied himself to the neighbouring mountain races and gave
considerable trouble to Sargon, the Assyrian king, who was obliged to
undertake an expedition to check their aggressions.

It was probably Rusas I who erected the buildings on Toprak Kala, the
hill to the east of Van, traces of which remain to the present day. He
built a palace and a temple, and around them he constructed a new city
with a reservoir to supply it with water, possibly because the slopes
of Toprak Kala rendered it easier of defence than the city in the
plain (beneath the rock and citadel) which had fallen an easy prey to
Tiglath-pileser III. The site of the temple on Toprak Kala has been
excavated by the trustees of the British Museum, and our knowledge of
Vannic art is derived from the shields and helmets of bronze and small
bronze figures and fittings which were recovered from this building. One
of the shields brought to the British Museum from the Toprak Kala, where
it originally hung with others on the temple walls, bears the name of
Argistis II, who was the son and successor of Rusas I, and who attempted
to give trouble to the Assyrians by stirring the inhabitants of the land
of Kummukh (Kommagene) to revolt against Sargon. His son, Rusas II,
was the contemporary of Esarhaddon, and from some recently discovered
rock-inscriptions we learn that he extended the limits of his kingdom on
the west and secured victories against Mushki (Meshech) to the southeast
of the Halys and against the Hittites in Northern Syria. Rusas III
rebuilt the temple on Toprak Kala, as we know from an inscription of his
on one of the shields from that place in the British Museum. Both he and
Sarduris III were on friendly terms with the Assyrians, for we know that
they both sent embassies to Ashur-bani-pal.

By far the larger number of rock-inscriptions that have yet been found
and copied in the mountainous districts bordering on Assyria were
engraved by this ancient Vannic people, and Drs. Lehmann and Belck have
done good service by making careful copies and collations of all those
which are at present known. Work on other classes of rock-inscriptions
has also been carried on by other travellers. A new edition of the
inscriptions of Sennacherib in the gorge of the Gomel, near the village
of Bavian, has been made by Mr. King, who has also been fortunate enough
to find a number of hitherto unknown inscriptions in Kurdistan on the
Judi Dagh and at the sources of the Tigris. The inscriptions at
the mouth of the Nahr el-Kelb, “the Dog River,” in Syria, have
been reexamined by Dr. Knudtzon, and the long inscription which
Nebuchadnezzar II cut on the rocks at Wadi Brissa in the Lebanon,
formerly published by M. Pognon, has been recopied by Dr. Weissbach.
Finally, the great trilingual inscription of Darius Hystaspes on the
rock at Bisutun in Persia, which was formerly copied by the late Sir
Henry Raw-linson and used by him for the successful decipherment of the
cuneiform inscriptions, was completely copied last year by Messrs. King
and Thompson.

     Messrs. King and Thompson are preparing a new edition of
     this inscription.

The main facts of the history of Assyria under her later kings and of
Babylonia during the Neo-Babylonian and Persian periods were many years
ago correctly ascertained, and recent excavation and research have done
little to add to our knowledge of the history of these periods. It was
hoped that the excavations conducted by Dr. Koldewey at Babylon would
result in the recovery of a wealth of inscriptions and records referring
to the later history of the country, but unfortunately comparatively
few tablets or inscriptions have been found, and those that have been
recovered consist mainly of building-inscriptions and votive texts. One
such building-inscription contains an interesting historical reference.
It occurs on a barrel-cylinder of clay inscribed with a text of
Nabopolassar, and it was found in the temple of Ninib and records the
completion and restoration of the temple by the king. In addition to
recording the building operations he had carried out in the temple,
Nabopolassar boasts of his opposition to the Assyrians. He says: “As for
the Assyrians who had ruled all peoples from distant days and had set
the people of the land under a heavy yoke, I, the weak and humble man
who worshippeth the Lord of Lords (i.e. the god Marduk), through the
mighty power of Nabû and Marduk, my lords, held back their feet from the
land of Akkad and cast off their yoke.”

It is not yet certain whether the Babylonians under Nabopolassar
actively assisted Cyaxares and the Medes in the siege and in the
subsequent capture of Nineveh in 606 B.C. but this newly discovered
reference to the Assyrians by Nabopolassar may possibly be taken
to imply that the Babylonians were passive and not active allies of
Cyaxares. If the cylinder were inscribed after the fall of Nineveh we
should have expected Nabopolassar, had he taken an active part in the
capture of the city, to have boasted in more definite terms of his
achievement. On his stele which is preserved at Constantinople,
Nabonidus, the last king of the Neo-Babylonian empire, who himself
suffered defeat at the hands of Cyrus, King of Persia, ascribed the fall
of Nineveh to the anger of Marduk and the other gods of Babylon because
of the destruction of their city and the spoliation of their temples by
Sennacherib in 689 B.C. We see the irony of fate in the fact that Cyrus
also ascribed the defeat and deposition of Nabonidus and the fall of
Babylon to Marduk’s intervention, whose anger he alleges was aroused
by the attempt of Nabonidus to concentrate the worship of the local
city-gods in Babylon.

Thus it will be seen that recent excavation and research have not
yet supplied the data for filling in such gaps as still remain in our
knowledge of the later history of Assyria and Babylon. The closing
years of the Assyrian empire and the military achievements of the great
Neo-Babylonian rulers, Nabopolassar, Nerig-lissar, and Nebuchadnezzar
II, have not yet been found recorded in any published Assyrian or
Babylonian inscription, but it may be expected that at any moment
some text will be discovered that will throw light upon the problems
connected with the history of those periods which still await solution.
Meanwhile, the excavations at Babylon, although they have not added
much to our knowledge of the later history of the country, have been
of immense service in revealing the topography of the city during the
Neo-Babylonian period, as well as the positions, plans, and characters
of the principal buildings erected by the later Babylonian kings. The
discovery of the palaces of Nebuchadnezzar II on the mound of the Kasr,
of the small but complete temple E-makh, of the temple of the goddess
Nin-makh to the northeast of the palaces, and of the sacred road
dividing them and passing through the Great Gate of Ishtar (adorned with
representations of lions, bulls, and dragons in raised brick upon its
walls) has enabled us to form some conception of the splendour and
magnificence of the city as it appeared when rebuilt by its last native
rulers. Moreover, the great temple E-sagila, the famous shrine of the
god Marduk, has been identified and partly excavated beneath the huge
mound of Tell Amran ibn-Ali, while a smaller and less famous temple of
Ninib has been discovered in the lower mounds which lie to the eastward.
Finally, the sacred way from E-sagila to the palace mound has been
traced and uncovered. We are thus enabled to reconstitute the scene of
the most solemn rite of the Babylonian festival of the New Year, when
the statue of the god Marduk was carried in solemn procession along this
road from the temple to the palace, and the Babylonian king made his
yearly obeisance to the national god, placing his own hands within those
of Marduk, in token of his submission to and dependence on the divine
will.

[Illustration: 425.jpg WITHIN THE SHRINE OP E-MAKH, THE TEMPLE OP THE
GODDESS NIN-MAKH.]

Though recent excavations have not led to any startling discoveries
with regard to the history of Western Asia during the last years of
the Babylonian empire, research among the tablets dating from the
Neo-Babylonian and Persian periods has lately added considerably to our
knowledge of Babylonian literature. These periods were marked by great
literary activity on the part of the priests at Babylon, Sippar, and
elsewhere, who, under the royal orders, scoured the country for all
remains of the early literature which was preserved in the ancient
temples and archives of the country, and made careful copies and
collections of all they found. Many of these tablets containing
Neo-Babylonian copies of earlier literary texts are preserved in the
British Museum, and have been recently published, and we have thus
recovered some of the principal grammatical, religious, and magical
compositions of the earlier Babylonian period.

[Illustration: 426.jpg TRENCH IN THE BABYLONIAN PLAIN]

     Between The Mound Of The Kasr And Tell Amran Ibn-Ali,
     Showing A Section Of The Paved Sacred Way.

Among the most interesting of such recent finds is a series of tablets
inscribed with the Babylonian legends concerning the creation of the
world and man, which present many new and striking parallels to the
beliefs on these subjects embodied in Hebrew literature. We have not
space to treat this subject at greater length in the present work, but
we may here note that discovery and research in its relation to the
later empires that ruled at Babylon have produced results of literary
rather than of historical importance. But we should exceed the space
at our disposal if we attempted even to skim this fascinating field of
study in which so much has recently been achieved. For it is time we
turned once more to Egypt and directed our inquiry towards ascertaining
what recent research has to tell us with regard to her inhabitants
during the later periods of her existence as a nation of the ancient
world.




CHAPTER IX--THE LAST DAYS OF ANCIENT EGYPT


Before we turned from Egypt to summarize the information, afforded by
recent discoveries, upon the history of Western Asia under the kings
of the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian periods, we noted that the Asiatic
empire of Egypt was regained by the reactionary kings of the XIXth
Dynasty, after its temporary loss owing to the vagaries of Akhunaten.
Palestine remained Egyptian throughout the period of the judges until
the foundation of the kingdom of Judah. With the decline of military
spirit in Egypt and the increasing power of the priesthood, authority
over Asia became less and less a reality. Tribute was no longer paid,
and the tribes wrangled without a restraining hand, during the reigns of
the successors of Ramses III. By the time of the priest-kings of Thebes
(the XXIst Dynasty) the authority of the Pharaohs had ceased to be
exercised in Syria. Egypt was itself divided into two kingdoms, the one
ruled by Northern descendants of the Ramessids at Tanis, the other by
the priestly monarchs at Thebes, who reigned by right of inheritance as
a result of the marriage of the daughter of Ramses with the high
priest Amenhetep, father of Herhor, the first priest-king. The Thebans
fortified Gebelên in the South and el-Hêbi in the North against attack,
and evidently their relations with the Tanites were not always friendly.

In Syria nothing of the imperial power remained. The prestige of the god
Amen of Thebes, however, was still very great. We see this clearly from
a very interesting papyrus of the reign of Herhor, published in 1899 by
Mr. Golenischeff, which describes the adventures of Uenuamen, an envoy
sent (about 1050 B.C.) to Phoenicia to bring wood from the mountains of
Lebanon for the construction of a great festival bark of the god Amen
at Thebes. In the course of his mission he was very badly treated
(We cannot well imagine Thothmes III or Amenhetep III tolerating
ill-treatment of their envoy!) and eventually shipwrecked on the coast
of the land of Alashiya or Cyprus. He tells us in the papyrus, which
seems to be the official report of his mission, that, having been given
letters of credence to the Prince of Byblos from the King of Tanis,
“to whom Amen had given charge of his North-land,” he at length reached
Phoenicia, and after much discussion and argument was able to prevail
upon the prince to have the wood which he wanted brought down from
Lebanon to the seashore.

Here, however, a difficulty presented itself,--the harbour was filled
with the piratical ships of the Cretan Tjakaray, who refused to allow
Uenuamen to return to Egypt. They said, ‘Seize him; let no ship of his
go unto the land of Egypt!’ “Then,” says Uenuamen in the papyrus, “I sat
down and wept. The scribe of the prince came out unto me; he said unto
me, ‘What ail-eth thee?’ I replied, ‘Seest thou not the birds which fly,
which fly back unto Egypt? Look at them, they go unto the cool canal,
and how long do I remain abandoned here? Seest thou not those who would
prevent my return?’ He went away and spoke unto the prince, who began
to weep at the words which were told unto him and which were so sad. He
sent his scribe out unto me, who brought me two measures of wine and a
deer. He sent me Tentnuet, an Egyptian singing-girl who was with him,
saying unto her, ‘Sing unto him, that he may not grieve!’ He sent word
unto me, ‘Eat, drink, and grieve not! To-morrow shalt thou hear all that
I shall say.’ On the morrow he had the people of his harbour summoned,
and he stood in the midst of them, and he said unto the Tjakaray, ‘What
aileth you?’ They answered him, ‘We will pursue the piratical ships
which thou sendest unto Egypt with our unhappy companions.’ He said unto
them, ‘I cannot seize the ambassador of Amen in my land. Let me send him
away and then do ye pursue after him to seize him!’ He sent me on board,
and he sent me away... to the haven of the sea. The wind drove me upon
the land of Alashiya. The people of the city came out in order to slay
me. I was dragged by them to the place where Hatiba, the queen of the
city, was. I met her as she was going out of one of her houses into
the other. I greeted her and said unto the people who stood by her, ‘Is
there not one among you who understandeth the speech of Egypt?’ One
of them replied, ‘I understand it.’ I said unto him, ‘Say unto thy
mistress: even as far as the city in which Amen dwelleth (i. e. Thebes)
have I heard the proverb, “In all cities is injustice done; only in
Alashiya is justice to be found,” and now is injustice done here every
day!’ She said, ‘What is it that thou sayest?’ I said unto her, ‘Since
the sea raged and the wind drove me upon the land in which thou livest,
therefore thou wilt not allow them to seize my body and to kill me, for
verily I am an ambassador of Amen. Remember that I am one who will be
sought for always. And if these men of the Prince of Byblos whom they
seek to kill (are killed), verily if their chief finds ten men of thine,
will he not kill them also?’ She summoned the men, and they were brought
before her. She said unto me, ‘Lie down and sleep...’”

At this point the papyrus breaks off, and we do not know how Uenuamen
returned to Egypt with his wood. The description of his casting-away and
landing on Alashiya is quite Homeric, and gives a vivid picture of the
manners of the time. The natural impulse of the islanders is to kill
the strange castaway, and only the fear of revenge and of the wrath of a
distant foreign deity restrains them. Alashiya is probably Cyprus, which
also bore the name Yantinay from the time of Thothmes III until the
seventh century, when it is called Yatnan by the Assyrians. A king
of Alashiya corresponded with Amenhetep III in cuneiform on terms of
perfect equality, three hundred years before: “Brother,” he writes,
“should the small amount of the copper which I have sent thee be
displeasing unto thy heart, it is because in my land the hand of Nergal
my lord slew all the men of my land (i.e. they died of the plague), and
there was no working of copper; and this was, my brother, not pleasing
unto thy heart. Thy messenger with my messenger swiftly will I send, and
whatsoever amount of copper thou hast asked for, O my brother, I,
even I, will send it unto thee.” The mention by Herhor’s envoy of
Nesibinebdad (Smendes), the King of Tanis, a powerful ruler who in
reality constantly threatened the existence of the priestly monarchy
at Thebes, as “him to whom Amen has committed the wardship of his
North-land,” is distinctly amusing. The hard fact of the independence of
Lower Egypt had to be glozed somehow.

The days of Theban power were coming to an end and only the prestige
of the god Amen remained strong for two hundred years more. But the
alliance of Amen and his priests with a band of predatory and destroying
foreign conquerors, the Ethiopians (whose rulers were the descendants
of the priest-kings, who retired to Napata on the succession of the
powerful Bubastite dynasty of Shishak to that of Tanis, abandoning
Thebes to the Northerners), did much to destroy the prestige of Amen
and of everything connected with him. An Ethiopian victory meant only
an Assyrian reconquest, and between them Ethiopians and Assyrians had
well-nigh ruined Egypt. In the Saïte period Thebes had declined greatly
in power as well as in influence, and all its traditions were anathema
to the leading people of the time, although not of course in Akhunaten’s
sense.

With the Saïte period we seem almost to have retraced our steps and to
have reentered the age of the Pyramid Builders. All the pomp and glory
of Thothmes, Amenhetep, and Ramses were gone. The days of imperial Egypt
were over, and the minds of men, sickened of foreign war, turned for
peace and quietness to the simpler ideals of the IVth and Vth Dynasties.
We have already seen that an archaistic revival of the styles of the
early dynasties is characteristic of this late period, and that men
were buried at Sakkâra and at Thebes in tombs which recall in form and
decoration those of the courtiers of the Pyramid Builders. Everywhere
we see this fashion of archaism. A Theban noble of this period named
Aba was buried at Thebes. Long ago, nearly three thousand years before,
under the VIth Dynasty, there had lived a great noble of the same name,
who was buried in a rock-tomb at Dêr el-Gebrâwî, in Middle Egypt. This
tomb was open and known in the days of the second Aba, who caused to be
copied and reproduced in his tomb in the Asasîf at Thebes most of the
scenes from the bas-relief with which it had been decorated. The tomb
of the VIth Dynasty Aba has lately been copied for the Archaeological
Survey of Egypt (Egypt Exploration Fund) by Mr. de Garis Davies, who has
found the reliefs of the XXVIth Dynasty Aba of considerable use to him
in reconstituting destroyed portions of their ancient originals.

During late years important discoveries of objects of this era have been
few. One of the most noteworthy is that of a contemporary inscription
describing the battle of Momemphis, which is mentioned by Herodotus (ii,
163, 169). We now have the official account of this battle, and know
that it took place in the third year of the reign of Amasis--not before
he became king. This was the fight in which the unpatriotic king,
Apries, who had paid for his partiality for the Greeks of Nau-kratis
with the loss of his throne, was finally defeated. As we see from this
inscription, he was probably murdered by the country people during his
flight.

The following are the most important passages of the inscription: “His
Majesty (Amasis) was in the Festival-Hall, discussing plans for his
whole land, when one came to say unto him, ‘Hââ-ab-Râ (Apries) is rowing
up; he hath gone on board the ships which have crossed over. Haunebu
(Greeks), one knows not their number, are traversing the North-land,
which is as if it had no master to rule it; he (Apries) hath summoned
them, they are coming round him. It is he who hath arranged their
settlement in the Peh-ân (the An-dropolite name); they infest the whole
breadth of Egypt, those who are on thy waters fly before them!’... His
Majesty mounted his chariot, having taken lance and bow in his hand...
(the enemy) reached Andropolis; the soldiers sang with joy on the
roads... they did their duty in destroying the enemy. His Majesty fought
like a lion; he made victims among them, one knows not how many. The
ships and their warriors were overturned, they saw the depths as do the
fishes. Like a flame he extended, making a feast of fighting. His heart
rejoiced.... The third year, the 8th Athyr, one came to tell Majesty:
‘Let their vile-ness be ended! They throng the roads, there are
thousands there ravaging the land; they fill every road. Those who are
in ships bear thy terror in their hearts. But it is not yet finished.’
Said his Majesty unto his soldiers: ‘...Young men and old men, do this
in the cities and nomes!’... Going upon every road, let not a day pass
without fighting their galleys!’... The land was traversed as by the
blast of a tempest, destroying their ships, which were abandoned by the
crews. The people accomplished their fate, killing the prince (Apries)
on his couch, when he had gone to repose in his cabin. When he saw his
friend overthrown... his Majesty himself buried him (Apries), in order
to establish him as a king possessing virtue, for his Majesty decreed
that the hatred of the gods should be removed from him.”

This is the event to which we have already referred in a preceding
chapter, as proving the great amelioration of Egyptian ideas with regard
to the treatment of a conquered enemy, as compared with those of other
ancient nations. Amasis refers to the deposed monarch as his “friend,”
 and buries him in a manner befitting a king at the charges of Amasis
himself. This act warded off from the spirit of Apries the just anger
of the gods at his partiality for the “foreign devils,” and ensured his
reception by Osiris as a king neb menkh, “possessing virtues.”

The town of Naukratis, where Apries established himself, had been
granted to the Greek traders by Psametik I a century or more before. Mr.
D. G. Hogarth’s recent exploration of the site has led to a considerable
modification of our first ideas of the place, which were obtained
from Prof. Petrie ‘s excavations. Prof. Petrie was the discoverer of
Naukratis, and his diggings told us what Naukratis was like in the first
instance, but Mr. Hogarth has shown that several of his identifications
were erroneous and that the map of the place must be redrawn. The chief
error was in the placing of the Hellenion (the great meeting-place of
the Greeks), which is now known to be in quite a different position from
that assigned to it by Prof. Petrie. The “Great Temenos” of Prof. Petrie
has now been shown to be non-existent. Mr. Hogarth has also pointed out
that an old Egyptian town existed at Nau-kratis long before the Greeks
came there. This town is mentioned on a very interesting stele of black
basalt (discovered at Tell Gaif, the site of Naukratis, and now in the
Cairo Museum), under the name of “Permerti, which is called Nukrate.”
 The first is the old Egyptian name, the second the Greek name adapted
to Egyptian hieroglyphs. The stele was erected by Tekhtnebf, the last
native king of Egypt, to commemorate his gifts to the temples of Neïth
on the occasion of his accession at Sais. It is beautifully cut, and the
inscription is written in a curious manner, with alphabetic spellings
instead of ideographs, and ideographs instead of alphabetic spellings,
which savours fully of the affectation of the learned pedant who drafted
it; for now, of course, in the fourth century before Christ, nobody but
a priestly antiquarian could read hieroglyphics. Demotic was the only
writing for practical purposes.

We see this fact well illustrated in the inscriptions of the Ptolemaïc
temples. The accession of the Ptolemies marked a great increase in the
material wealth of Egypt, and foreign conquest again came in fashion.
Ptolemy Euergetes marched into Asia in the grand style of a Ramses and
brought back the images of gods which had been carried off by Esarhaddon
or Nebuchadnezzar II centuries before. He was received on his return
to Egypt with acclamations as a true successor of the Pharaohs. The
imperial spirit was again in vogue, and the archaistic simplicity and
independence of the Saïtes gave place to an archaistic imperialism, the
first-fruits of which were the repair and building of temples in the
great Pharaonic style. On these we see the Ptolemies masquerading as
Pharaohs, and the climax of absurdity is reached when Ptolemy Auletes
(the Piper) is seen striking down Asiatic enemies in the manner of
Amen-hetep or Ramses! This scene is directly copied from a Ramesside
temple, and we find imitations of reliefs of Ramses II so slavish that
the name of the earlier king is actually copied, as well as the relief,
and appears above the figure of a Ptolemy. The names of the nations who
were conquered by Thothmes III are repeated on Ptolemaic sculptures to
do duty for the conquered of Euergetes, with all sorts of mistakes
in spelling, naturally, and also with later interpolations. Such an
inscription is that in the temple of Kom Ombo, which Prof. Say ce has
held to contain the names of “Caphtor and Casluhim” and to prove the
knowledge of the latter name in the fourteenth century before Christ.
The name of Caphtor is the old Egyptian Keftiu (Crete); that of Casluhim
is unknown in real Old Egyptian inscriptions, and in this Ptolemaic list
at Kom Ombo it may be quite a late interpolation in the lists, perhaps
no older than the Persian period, since we find the names of Parsa
(Persia) and Susa, which were certainly unknown to Thothmes III,
included in it. We see generally from the Ptolemaic inscriptions that
nobody could read them but a few priests, who often made mistakes. One
of the most serious was the identification of Keftiu with Phoenicia in
the Stele of Canopus. This misled modern archaeologists down to the
time of Dr. Evans’s discoveries at Knossos, though how these utterly
un-Semitic looking Keftiu could have been Phoenicians was a puzzle to
everybody. We now know, of course, that they were Mycenaean or
Minoan Cretans, and that the Ptolemaic antiquaries made a mistake in
identifying the land of Keftiu with Phoenicia.

We must not, however, say too much in dispraise of the Ptolemaic
Egyptians and their works. We have to be grateful to them indeed for the
building of the temples of Edfu and Dendera, which, owing to their later
date, are still in good preservation, while the best preserved of the
old Pharaonic fanes, such as Medinet Habû, have suffered considerably
from the ravages of time. Eor these temples show us to-day what an
old Egyptian temple, when perfect, really looked like. They are, so to
speak, perfect mummies of temples, while of the old buildings we have
nothing but the disjointed and damaged skeletons.

A good deal of repairing has been done to these buildings, especially
to that at Edfu, of late years. But the main archaeological interest of
Ptolemaic and Roman times has been found in the field of epigraphy and
the study of papyri, with which the names of Messrs. Kenyon, Grenfell,
and Hunt are chiefly connected. The treasures which have lately been
obtained by the British Museum in the shape of the manuscripts of
Aristotle’s “Constitution of Athens,” the lost poems of Bacchylides, and
the Mimes of Herondas, all of which have been published for the trustees
of that institution by Mr. Kenyon, are known to those who are interested
in these subjects. The long series of publications of Messrs.
Grenfell and Hunt, issued at the expense of the Egypt Exploration Fund
(Graeco-Roman branch), with the exception of the volume of discoveries
at Teb-tunis, which was issued by the University of California, is also
well known.

The two places with which Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt’s work has been
chiefly connected are the Fayyûm and Behnesâ, the site of the ancient
Permje or Oxyr-rhynchus. The lake-province of the Fayyûm, which attained
such prominence in the days of the XIIth Dynasty, seems to have had
little or no history during the whole period of the New Empire, but in
Ptolemaic times it revived and again became one of the richest and
most important provinces of Egypt. The town of Arsinoë was founded at
Crocodilopolis, where are now the mounds of Kom el-Fâris (The Mound of
the Horseman), near Medinet el-Payyum, and became the capital of the
province. At Illahûn, just outside the entrance to the Fayyûm, was the
great Nile harbour and entrepôt of the lake-district, called Ptolemaïs
Hormos.

The explorations of Messrs. Hogarth, Grenfell, and Hunt in the years
of 1895-6 and 1898-9 resulted in the identification of the sites of the
ancient cities of Karanis (Kom Ushîm), Bacchias (Omm el-’Atl), Euhemeria
(Kasr el-Banât), Theadelphia (Harît), and Philoteris (Wadfa). The work
for the University of California in 18991900 at Umm el-Baragat showed
that this place was Tebtunis. Dime, on the northern coast of the Birket
Karûn, the modern representative of the ancient Lake Moeris, is now
known to be the ancient Sokno-paiou Nesos (the Isle of Soknopaios), a
local form of Sebek, the crocodile-god of the Fayyûm. At Karanis this
god was worshipped under the name of Petesuchos (“He whom Sebek
has given”), in conjunction with Osiris Pnepherôs (P-nefer-ho,
“the beautiful of face”); at Tebtunis he became Seknebtunis., i.e.
Sebek-neb-Teb-tunis (Sebek, lord of Tebtunis). This is a typical example
of the portmanteau pronunciations of the latter-day Egyptians.

Many very interesting discoveries were made during the course of the
excavations of these places (besides Mr. Hogarth’s find of the temple
of Petesuchos and Pnepherôs at Karanis), consisting of Roman pottery
of varied form and Roman agricultural implements, including a perfect
plough.* The main interest of all, however, lies, both here and at
Behnesâ, in the papyri. They consist of Greek and Latin documents of
all ages from the early Ptolemaic to the Christian. In fact, Messrs.
Grenfell and Hunt have been unearthing and sifting the contents of the
waste-paper baskets of the ancient Ptolemaic and Roman Egyptians, which
had been thrown out on to dust-heaps near the towns. Nothing perishes
in,, the dry climate and soil of Egypt, so the contents of the ancient
dust-heaps have been preserved intact until our own day, and have been
found by Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt, just as the contents of the houses
of the ancient Indian rulers of Chinese Turkestan, at Niya and Khotan,
with their store of Kha-roshthi documents, have been preserved intact in
the dry Tibetan desert climate and have been found by Dr. Stein.** There
is much analogy between the discoveries of Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt in
Egypt and those of Dr. Stein in Turkestan.

     * Illustrated on Plate IX of Fayûm Towns and Their Papyri.

     ** See Dr. Stein’s Sand-buried Ruins of Khotan, London,
     1903.

The Græco-Egyptian documents are of all kinds, consisting of letters,
lists, deeds, notices, tax-assessments, receipts, accounts, and business
records of every sort and kind, besides new fragments of classical
authors and the important “Sayings of Jesus,” discovered at Behnesâ,
which have been published in a special popular form by the Egypt
Exploration Fund.*

     * Aoyla ‘Itjffov, 1897, and New Sayings of Jesus, 1904.

These last fragments of the oldest Christian literature, which are
of such great importance and interest to all Christians, cannot be
described or discussed here. The other documents are no less
important to the student of ancient literature, the historian, and the
sociologist. The classical fragments include many texts of lost authors,
including Menander. We will give a few specimens of the private
letters and documents, which will show how extremely modern the ancient
Egyptians were, and how little difference there actually is between our
civilization and theirs, except in the-matter of mechanical invention.
They had no locomotives and telephones; otherwise they were the same. We
resemble them much more than we resemble our mediaeval ancestors or even
the Elizabethans.

This is a boy’s letter to his father, who would not take him up to town
with him to see the sights: “Theon to his father Theon, greeting. It was
a fine thing of you not to take me with you to the city! If you won’t
take me with you to Alexandria, I won’t write you a letter, or speak to
you, or say good-bye to you; and if you go to Alexandria I won’t take
your hand or ever greet you again. That is what will happen if you
won’t take me. Mother said to Archelaus, ‘It quite upsets him to be left
behind.’ It was good of you to send me presents on the 12th, the day
you sailed. Send me a lyre, I implore you. If you don’t, I won’t eat, I
won’t drink: there now!’” Is not this more like the letter of a spoiled
child of to-day than are the solemnly dutiful epistles of even our
grandfathers and grandmothers when young? The touch about “Mother said
to Archelaus, ‘It quite upsets him to be left behind’” is delightfully
like the modern small boy, and the final request and threat are also
eminently characteristic.

Here is a letter asking somebody to redeem the writer’s property from
the pawnshop: “Now please redeem my property from Sarapion. It is
pledged for two minas. I have paid the interest up to the month Epeiph,
at the rate of a stater per mina. There is a casket of incense-wood,
and another of onyx, a tunic, a white veil with a real purple border, a
handkerchief, a tunic with a Laconian stripe, a garment of purple linen,
two armlets, a necklace, a coverlet, a figure of Aphrodite, a cup, a big
tin flask, and a wine-jar. From Onetor get the two bracelets. They have
been pledged since the month Tybi of last year for eight... at the
rate of a stater per mina. If the cash is insufficient owing to the
carelessness of Theagenis, if, I say, it is insufficient, sell the
bracelets and make up the money.” Here is an affectionate letter of
invitation: “Greeting, my dear Serenia, from Petosiris. Be sure, dear,
to come up on the 20th for the birthday festival of the god, and let me
know whether you are coming by boat or by donkey, that we may send for
you accordingly. Take care not to forget.”

Here is an advertisement of a gymnastic display:

“The assault-at-arms by the youths will take place to-morrow, the 24th.
Tradition, no less than the distinguished character of the festival,
requires that they should do their utmost in the gymnastic display. Two
performances.” Signed by Dioskourides, magistrate of Oxyrrhynchus.

Here is a report from a public physician to a magistrate: “To
Claudianus, the mayor, from Dionysos, public physician. I was to-day
instructed by you, through Herakleides your assistant, to inspect the
body of a man who had been found hanged, named Hierax, and to report to
you my opinion of it. I therefore inspected the body in the presence
of the aforesaid Herakleides at the house of Epagathus in the Broadway
ward, and found it hanged by a noose, which fact I accordingly report.”
 Dated in the twelfth year of Marcus Aurelius (A.D. 173).

The above translations are taken, slightly modified, from those in The
Oxyrrhynchus Papyri, vol. i. The next specimen, a quaint letter, is
translated from the text in Mr. Grenfell’s Greek Papyri (Oxford, 1896),
p. 69: “To Noumen, police captain and mayor, from Pokas son of Onôs,
unpaid policeman. I have been maltreated by Peadius the priest of the
temple of Sebek in Crocodilopolis. On the first epagomenal day of the
eleventh year, after having abused me about... in the aforesaid temple,
the person complained against sprang upon me and in the presence of
witnesses struck me many blows with a stick which he had. And as part of
my body was not covered, he tore my shirt, and this fact I called upon
the bystanders to bear witness to. Wherefore I request that if it seems
proper you will write to Klearchos the headman to send him to you, in
order that, if what I have written is true, I may obtain justice at your
hands.”

A will of Hadrian’s reign, taken from the Oxyrrhynchus Papyri (i, p.
173), may also be of interest: “This is the last will and testament,
made in the street (i.e. at a street notary’s stand), of Pekysis, son of
Hermes and Didyme, an inhabitant of Oxyrrhynchus, being sane and in his
right mind. So long as I live, I am to have powers over my property,
to alter my will as I please. But if I die with this will unchanged, I
devise my daughter Ammonous whose mother is Ptolema, if she survive me,
but if not then her children, heir to my shares in the common house,
court, and rooms situate in the Cretan ward. All the furniture,
movables, and household stock and other property whatever that I shall
leave, I bequeath to the mother of my children and my wife Ptolema, the
freedwoman of Demetrius, son of Hermippus, with the condition that
she shall have for her lifetime the right of using, dwelling in, and
building in the said house, court, and rooms. If Ammonous should die
without children and intestate, the share of the fixtures shall belong
to her half-brother on the mother’s side, Anatas, if he survive, but if
not, to... No one shall violate the terms of this my will under pain of
paying to my daughter and heir Ammonous a fine of 1,000 drachmae and to
the treasury an equal sum.” Here follow the signatures of testator and
witnesses, who are described, as in a passport, one of them as follows:
“I, Dionysios, son of Dionysios of the same city, witness the will of
Pekysis. I am forty-six years of age, have a curl over my right temple,
and this is my seal of Dionysoplaton.”

During the Roman period, which we have now reached in our survey, the
temple building of the Ptolemies was carried on with like energy. One of
the best-known temples of the Roman period is that at Philse, which
is known as the “Kiosk,” or “Pharaoh’s Bed.” Owing to the great
picturesqueness of its situation, this small temple, which was built in
the reign of Trajan, has been a favourite subject for the painters of
the last fifty years, and next to the Pyramids, the Sphinx, and Karnak,
it is probably the most widely known of all Egyptian buildings. Recently
it has come very much to the front for an additional reason. Like all
the other temples of Philse, it had been archæologically surveyed and
cleared by Col. H. Gr. Lyons and Dr. Borchardt, but further work of a
far-reaching character was rendered necessary by the building of the
great Aswan dam, below the island of Philse, one of the results of
which has been the partial submergence of the island and its temples,
including the picturesque Kiosk. The following account, taken from the
new edition (1906) of Murray’s _Guide to Egypt and the Sudan_, will
suffice better than any other description to explain what the dam is,
how it has affected Philse, and what work has been done to obviate the
possibility of serious damage to the Kiosk and other buildings.

“In 1898 the Egyptian government signed a contract with Messrs. John
Aird & Co. for the construction of the great reservoir and dam at
Shellâl, which serves for the storage of water at the time of the flood
Nile. The river is ‘held up’ here sixty-five feet above its old normal
level. A great masonry dyke, 150 feet high in places, has been carried
across the Bab el-Kebir of the First Cataract, and a canal and four
locks, two hundred feet long and thirty feet wide, allow for the passage
of traffic up and down the river.

[Illustration: 447.jpg The Great Dam Of Aswân]

     Showing Water Rushing Through The Sluices

The dam is 2,185 yards long and over ninety feet thick at the base; in
places it rises one hundred feet above the bed of the river. It is built
of the local red granite, and at each end the granite dam is built into
the granite hillside. Seven hundred and eight thousand cubic yards of
masonry were used. The sluices are 180 in number, and are arranged at
four different levels. The sight of the great volume of water pouring
through them is a very fine one. The Nile begins to rise in July, and at
the end of November it is necessary to begin closing the sluice-gates
to hold up the water. By the end of February the reservoir is usually
filled and Philæ partially submerged, so that boats can sail in and out
of the colonnades and Pharaoh’s Bed. By the beginning of July the water
has been distributed, and it then falls to its normal level.

“It is of course regrettable that the engineers were unable to find
another site for the dam, as it seemed inevitable that some damage would
result to the temples of Philæ from their partial submergence. Korosko
was proposed as a site, but was rejected for cogent reasons, and
apparently Shellâl was the only possible place. Further, no serious
person, who places the greatest good of the greatest number above
considerations of the picturesque and the ‘interesting,’ will deny
that if it is necessary to sacrifice Philæ to the good of the people of
Egypt, Philæ must go. ‘Let the dead bury their dead.’ The concern of the
rulers of Egypt must be with the living people of Egypt rather than with
the dead bones of the past; and they would not be doing their duty did
they for a moment allow artistic and archaeological considerations to
outweigh in their minds the practical necessities of the country. This
does not in the least imply that they do not owe a lesser duty to the
monuments of Egypt, which are among the most precious relics of the past
history of mankind. They do owe this lesser duty, and with regard to
Philae it has been conscientiously fulfilled. The whole temple, in order
that its stability may be preserved under the stress of submersion, has
been braced up and underpinned, under the superintendence of Mr. Ball,
of the Survey Department, who has most efficiently carried out this
important work, at a cost of £22,000.

[Illustration: 449.jpg THE KIOSK AT PHILAE IN PROCESS OF UNDERPINNING
AND RESTORATION, JANUARY, 1902.]

Steel girders have been fixed across the island from quay to quay,
and these have been surrounded by cement masonry, made water-tight
by forcing in cement grout. Pharaoh’s Bed and the colonnade have been
firmly underpinned in cement masonry, and there is little doubt that the
actual stability of Philae is now more certain than that of any other
temple in Egypt. The only possible damage that can accrue to it is
the partial discolouration of the lower courses of the stonework of
Pharaoh’s Bed, etc., which already bear a distinct high-water mark. Some
surface disintegration from the formation of salt crystals is perhaps
inevitable here, but the effects of this can always be neutralized
by careful washing, which it should be an important charge of the
Antiquities Department to regularly carry out.”

[Illustration: 450.jpg THE ANCIENT QUAY OP PHILÆ, NOVEMBER, 1904.]

     This is entirely covered when the reservoir is full, and the
     palm-trees are farther submerged.

The photographs accompanying the present chapter show the dam, the Kiosk
in process of conservation and underpinning (1902), and the shores of
the island as they now appear in the month of November, with the water
nearly up to the level of the quays. A view is also given of the island
of Konosso, with its inscriptions, as it is now. The island is simply a
huge granite boulder of the kind characteristic of the neighbourhood of
Shellâl (Phila?) and Aswan.

On the island of Elephantine, opposite Aswan, an interesting discovery
has lately been made by Mr. Howard Carter. This is a remarkable well,
which was supposed by the ancients to lie immediately on the tropic. It
formed the basis of Eratosthenes’ calculations of the measurement of the
earth. Important finds of documents written in Aramaic have also been
made here; they show that there was on the island in Ptolemaic times a
regular colony of Syrian merchants.

South of Aswan and Philse begins Nubia. The Nubian language, which is
quite different from Arabic, is spoken by everybody on the island of
Elephantine, and its various dialects are used as far south as Dongola,
where Arabic again is generally spoken till we reach the land of the
negroes, south of Khartum. In Ptolemaic and Roman days the Nubians were
a powerful people, and the whole of Nubia and the modern North Sudan
formed an independent kingdom, ruled by queens who bore the title or
name of Candace. It was the eunuch of a Candace who was converted to
Christianity as he was returning from a mission to Jerusalem to salute
Jehovah. “Go and join thyself unto his chariot” was the command to
Philip, and when the Ethiopian had heard the gospel from his lips he
went on his way rejoicing. The capital of this Candace was at Meroë, the
modern Bagarawiya, near Shendi. Here, and at Naga not far off, are
the remains of the temples of the Can-daces, great buildings of
semi-barbaric Egyptian style. For the civilization of the Nubians, such
as it was, was of Egyptian origin. Ever since Egyptian rule had been
extended southwards to Jebel Barkal, beyond Dongola, in the time of
Amenhetep II, Egyptian culture had influenced the Nubians. Amenhetep III
built a temple to Amen at Napatà, the capital of Nubia, which lay
under the shadow of Mount Barkal; Akhunaten erected a sanctuary of the
Sun-Disk there; and Ramses II also built there.

[Illustration: 452.jpg THE ROOK OF KONOSSO IN JANUARY, 1902, BEFORE THE
BUILDING OF THE DAM AND FORMATION OF THE RESERVOIR.]

The place in fact was a sort of appanage of the priests of Amen at
Thebes, and when the last priest-king evacuated Thebes, leaving it to
the Bubastites of the XXIId Dynasty, it was to distant Napata that he
retired. Here a priestly dynasty continued to reign until, two centuries
later, the troubles and misfortunes of Egypt seemed to afford an
opportunity for the reassertion of the exiled Theban power. Piankhi
Mera-men returned to Egypt in triumph as its rightful sovereign, but his
successors, Shabak, Shabatak, and Tirha-kah, had to contend constantly
with the Assyrians. Finally ITrdamaneh, Tirhakah’s successor, returned
to Nubia, leaving Egypt, in the decadence of the Assyrian might, free to
lead a quiet existence under Psametik I and the succeeding monarchs of
the XXVIth Dynasty. When Cambyses conquered Egypt he aspired to conquer
Nubia also, but his army was routed and destroyed by the Napatan king,
who tells us in an inscription how he defeated “the man Kambasauden,”
 who had attacked him. At Napata the Nubian monarchs, one of the greatest
of whom in Ptolemaic times was Ergam-enes, a contemporary of Ptolemy
Philopator, continued to reign. But the first Roman governor of Egypt,
Ælius Gallus, destroyed Napata, and the Nubians removed their capital
to Meroë, where the Candaces reigned.

The monuments of this Nubian kingdom, the temples of Jebel Barkal, the
pyramids of Nure close by, the pyramids of Bagarawiya, the temples of
Wadi Ben Naga, Mesawwarat en-Naga, and Mesawwarat es-Sufra (“Mesawwarat”
 proper), were originally investigated by Cailliaud and afterwards by
Lepsius. During the last few years they and the pyramids excavated by
Dr. E. A. Wallis-Budge, of the British Museum, for the Sudan government,
have been again explored. As the results of his work are not yet
fully published, it is possible at present only to quote the following
description from Cook’s _Handbook for Egypt and the Sudan_ (by Dr.
Budge), p. 6, of work on the pyramids of Jebel Barkal: “the writer
excavated the shafts of one of the pyramids here in 1897, and at the
depth of about twenty-five cubits found a group of three chambers, in
one of which were a number of bones of the sheep which was sacrificed
there about two thousand years ago, and also portions of a broken
amphora which had held Rho-dian wine. A second shaft, which led to the
mummy-chamber, was partly emptied, but at a further depth of twenty
cubits water was found. The high-water mark of the reservoir when full
is ------ and, as there were no visible means for pumping it out, the
mummy-chamber could not be entered.” With regard to the Bagarawîya
pyramids, Dr. Budge writes, on p. 700 of the same work, à propos of the
story of the Italian Ferlini that he found Roman jewelry in one of these
pyramids: “In 1903 the writer excavated a number of the pyramids of
Meroë for the Governor-General of the Sudan, Sir F. R. Wingate, and
he is convinced that the statements made by Ferlini are the result of
misapprehension on his part. The pyramids are solid throughout, and the
bodies are buried under them. When the details are complete the proofs
for this will be published.” Dr. Budge has also written upon the subject
of the orientation of the Jebel Barkal and Nure pyramids.

[Illustration: 454.jpg THE ISLE OF KONOSSO, WITH ITS INSCRIPTIONS]

It is very curious to find the pyramids reappearing in Egyptian
tomb-architecture in the very latest period of Egyptian history. We
find them when Egyptian civilization was just entering upon its vigorous
manhood, then they gradually disappear, only to revive in its decadent
and exiled old age. The Ethiopian pyramids are all of much more
elongated form than the old Egyptian ones. It is possible that they may
be a survival of the archaistic movement of the XXVIth Dynasty, to which
we have already referred.

These are not the latest Egyptian monuments in the Sudan, nor are the
temples of Naga and Mesawwarat the most ancient, though they belong
to the Roman period and are decidedly barbarian as to their style and,
especially, as to their decoration. The southernmost as well as latest
relic of Egypt in the Sudan is the Christian church of Soba, on the Blue
Mie, a few miles above Khartum. In it was found a stone ram, an emblem
of Amen-Râ, which had formerly stood in the temple of Naga and had been
brought to Soba perhaps under the impression that it was the Christian
Lamb. It was removed to the garden of the governor-general’s palace at
Khartum, where it now stands.

The church at Soba is a relic of the Christian kingdom of Alua, which
succeeded the realm of the Candaces. One of its chief seats was at
Dongola, and all Nubia is covered with the ruins of its churches. It
was, of course, an offshoot of the Christianity of Egypt, but a late
one, since Isis was still worshipped at Philse in the sixth century,
long after the Edict of Theodosius had officially abolished paganism
throughout the Roman world, and the Nubians were at first zealous
votaries of the goddess of Philo. So also when Egypt fell beneath the
sway of the Moslem in the seventh century, Nubia remained an independent
Christian state, and continued so down to the twelfth century, when the
soldiers of Islam conquered the country.

Of late pagan and early Christian Egypt very much that is new has been
discovered during the last few years. The period of the Lower Empire
has yielded much to the explorers of Oxyrrhynchus, and many papyri of
interest belonging to this period have been published by Mr. Kenyon in
his _Catalogue of the Greek Papyri in the British Museum_, especially
the letters of Flavius Abinæus, a military officer of the fourth
century. The papyri of this period are full of the high-flown titles
and affected phraseology which was so beloved of Byzantine scribes.
“Glorious Dukes of the Thebaïd,” “most magnificent counts and
lieutenants,” “all-praiseworthy secretaries,” and the like strut across
the pages of the letters and documents which begin “In the name of Our
Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, the God and Saviour of us all, in
the year x of the reign of the most divine and praised, great, and
beneficent Lord Flavius Heraclius (or other) the eternal Augustus and
Auto-krator, month x, year x of the In diction.” It is an extraordinary
period, this of the sixth and seventh centuries, which we have now
entered, with its bizarre combination of the official titulary of
the divine and eternal Cæsars Imperatores Augusti with the initial
invocation of Christ and the Trinity. It is the transition from the
ancient to the modern world, and as such has an interest all its own.

In Egypt the struggle between the adherents of Chalcedon, the “Melkites”
 or Imperialists of the orthodox Greek rite, and the Eutychians or
Mono-physites, the followers of the patriarch Dioskoros, who rejected
Chalcedon, was going on with unabated fury, and was hardly stopped even
by the invasion of the pagan Persians. The last effort of the party of
Constantinople to stamp out the Monophysite heresy was made when Cyril
was patriarch and governor of Egypt. According to an ingenious theory
put forward by Mr. Butler, in his _Arab Conquest of Egypt_, it is Cyril
the patriarch who was the mysterious Mukaukas, the [Greek word], or
“Great and Magnificent One,” who played so doubtful a part in the
epoch-making events of the Arab conquest by Amr in A.D. 639-41. Usually
this Mukaukas has been regarded as a “noble Copt,” and the Copts have
generally been credited with having assisted the Islamites against
the power of Constantinople. This was a very natural and probable
conclusion, but Mr. Butler will have it that the Copts resisted the
Arabs valiantly, and that the treacherous Mukaukas was none other than
the Constantinopolitan patriarch himself.

In the papyri it is interesting to note the gradual increase of Arab
names after the conquest, more especially in those of the Archduke
Rainer ‘s collection from the Fayyûm, which was so near the new capital
city, Fustât. In Upper Egypt the change was not noticeable for a long
time, and in the great collection of Coptic _ostraka_ (inscriptions on
slips of limestone and sherds of pottery, used as a substitute for paper
or parchment), found in the ruins of the Coptic monastery established,
on the temple site of Dêr el-Bahari, we find no Arab names. These
documents, part of which have been published by Mr. W. E. Crum for the
Egypt Exploration Fund, while another part will shortly be issued for
the trustees of the British Museum by Mr. Hall, date to the seventh and
eighth centuries. Their contents resemble those of the earlier papyri
from Oxyrrhynchus, though they are not of so varied a nature and are
generally written by persons of less intelligence, i.e. the monks and
peasants of the monasteries and villages of Tjême, or Western Thebes.
During the late excavation of the XIth Dynasty temple of Dêr el-Bahari,
more of these _ostraka_ were found, which will be published for the
Egypt Exploration Fund by Messrs. Naville and Hall. Of actual buildings
of the Coptic period the most important excavations have been those of
the French School of Cairo at Bâwît, north of Asyût. This work, which
was carried on by M. Jean Clédat, has resulted in the discovery of very
important frescoes and funerary inscriptions, belonging to the monastery
of a famous martyr, St. Apollo. With these new discoveries of Christian
Egypt our work reaches its fitting close. The frontier which divides the
ancient from the modern world has almost been crossed. We look back from
the monastery of Bâwît down a long vista of new discoveries until, four
thousand years before, we see again the Great Heads coming to the Tomb
of Den, Narmer inspecting the bodies of the dead Northerners, and,
far away in Babylonia, Narâm-Sin crossing the mountains of the East to
conquer Elam, or leading his allies against the prince of Sinai.

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History Of Egypt, Chaldæa, Syria,
Babylonia, And Assyria In The Light Of Recent Discovery, by L.W. King and H.R. Hall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF EGYPT ***

***** This file should be named 17321-0.txt or 17321-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/3/2/17321/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lectures on Language, by William S. Balch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lectures on Language
       As Particularly Connected with English Grammar.

Author: William S. Balch

Release Date: January 24, 2006 [EBook #17594]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LECTURES ON LANGUAGE ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Amy Cunningham, Bill Tozier
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

In this book, as well as using _ to indicate the italic font, the =
symbol has been used to show text printed in smaller capital letters in
the original printed version. Please see the HTML version for a more
accurate reproduction.

Bracketed words, such as [the?], were present in the original text. They
were not added by the transcriber.

Obvious printing errors were repaired; these changes are listed at the
end of the text. In ambiguous cases, the text has been left as it
appears in the original book. In particular, many mismatched quotation
marks have not been changed.




LECTURES ON LANGUAGE,

AS PARTICULARLY CONNECTED WITH

ENGLISH GRAMMAR.


DESIGNED FOR THE USE OF TEACHERS AND ADVANCED LEARNERS.


BY WM. S. BALCH.


Silence is better than unmeaning words.--_Pythagoras._


PROVIDENCE:
B. CRANSTON & CO.
1838.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1838,

BY B. CRANSTON & CO.

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of Rhode-Island.




                                        PROVIDENCE, Feb. 24, 1838.

TO WM. S. BALCH,

SIR--The undersigned, in behalf of the Young People's Institute, hasten
to present to you the following _Resolutions_, together with their
personal thanks, for the Lectures you have delivered before them, on the
Philosophy of Language. The uncommon degree of interest, pleasure and
profit, with which you have been listened to, is conclusive evidence,
that whoever possesses taste and talents to comprehend and appreciate
the philosophy of language, which you have so successfully cultivated,
cannot fail to attain a powerful influence over the minds of his
audience. The Committee respectfully request you to favor them with a
copy of your Lectures for the Press.

                    Very respectfully,
                        Your most obedient servants,
                                            C. T. JAMES,
                                            E. F. MILLER,
                                            H. L. WEBSTER.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Resolved_, That we have been highly entertained and greatly instructed
by the Lectures of our President, on the subject of Language; that we
consider the principles he has advocated, immutably true, exceedingly
important, and capable of an easy adoption in the study of that
important branch of human knowledge.

_Resolved_, That we have long regretted the want of a system to explain
the grammar of our vernacular tongue, on plain, rational, and consistent
principles, in accordance with philosophy and truth, and in a way to be
understood and practised by children and adults.

_Resolved_, That in our opinion, the manifold attempts which have been
made, though doubtless undertaken with the purest intentions, to
simplify and make easy existing systems, have failed entirely of their
object, and tended only to perplex, rather than enlighten learners.

_Resolved_, That in our belief, the publication of these Lectures would
meet the wants of the community, and throw a flood of light upon this
hitherto dark, and intricate, and yet exceedingly interesting department
of a common education, and thus prove of immense service to the present
and future generations.

_Resolved_, That Messrs. Charles T. James, Edward F. Miller, and Henry
L. Webster, be a Committee to wait on Rev. William S. Balch, and request
the publication of his very interesting Course of Lectures before this
Institute.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        PROVIDENCE, Feb. 25, 1838.

MESSRS. C. T. JAMES, E. F. MILLER, AND H. L. WEBSTER:

GENTLEMEN--Your letter, together with the Resolutions accompanying it,
was duly and gratefully received. It gives me no ordinary degree of
pleasure to know that so deep an interest has been, and still is, felt
by the members of our Institute, as well as the public generally, on
this important subject; for it is one which concerns the happiness and
welfare of our whole community; but especially the rising generation.

The only recommendation of these Lectures is the subject of which they
treat. They were written in the space of a few weeks, and in the midst
of an accumulation of engagements which almost forbade the attempt. But
presuming you will make all due allowances for whatever errors you may
discover in the style of composition, and regard the _matter_ more than
the _manner_, I consent to their publication, hoping they will be of
some service in the great cause of human improvement.

                    I am, gentlemen,
                        Very respectfully yours,
                                            WM. S. BALCH.




PREFACE.


There is no subject so deeply interesting and important to rational
beings as the knowledge of language, or one which presents a more direct
and powerful claim upon all classes in the community; for there is no
other so closely interwoven with all the affairs of human life, social,
moral, political and religious. It forms a basis on which depends a vast
portion of the happiness of mankind, and deserves the first attention of
every philanthropist.

Great difficulty has been experienced in the common method of explaining
language, and grammar has long been considered a dry, uninteresting, and
tedious study, by nearly all the teachers and scholars in the land. But
it is to be presumed that the fault in this case, if there is any, is to
be sought for in the manner of teaching, rather than in the science
itself; for it would be unreasonable to suppose that a subject which
occupies the earliest attention of the parent, which is acquired at
great expense of money, time, and thought, and is employed from the
cradle to the grave, in all our waking hours, can possibly be dull or
unimportant, if rightly explained.

Children have been required to learn verbal forms and changes, to look
at the mere signs of ideas, instead of the things represented by them.
The consequence has been that the whole subject has become uninteresting
to all who do not possess a retentive verbal memory. The philosophy of
language, the sublime principles on which it depends for its existence
and use, have not been sufficiently regarded to render it delightful and
profitable.

The humble attempt here made is designed to open the way for an
exposition of language on truly philosophical principles, which, when
correctly explained, are abundantly simple and extensively useful. With
what success this point has been labored the reader will determine.

The author claims not the honor of entire originality. The principles
here advanced have been advocated, believed, and successfully practised.
William S. Cardell, Esq., a bright star in the firmament of American
literature, reduced these principles to a system, which was taught with
triumphant success by Daniel H. Barnes, formerly of the New-York High
School, one of the most distinguished teachers who ever officiated in
that high and responsible capacity in our country. Both of these
gentlemen, so eminently calculated to elevate the standard of education,
were summoned from the career of the most active usefulness, from the
scenes they had labored to brighten and beautify by the aid of their
transcendant intellects, to unseen realities in the world of spirits;
where mind communes with mind, and soul mingles with soul, disenthraled
from error, and embosomed in the light and love of the Great Parent
Intellect.

The author does not pretend to give a system of exposition in this work
suited to the capacities of small children. It is designed for advanced
scholars, and is introductory to a system of grammar which he has in
preparation, which it is humbly hoped will be of some service in
rendering easy and correct the study of our vernacular language. But
this book, it is thought, may be successfully employed in the
instruction of the higher classes in our schools, and will be found an
efficient aid to teachers in inculcating the sublime principles of which
it treats.

These Lectures, as now presented to the public, it is believed, will be
found to contain some important information by which all may profit. The
reader will bear in mind that they were written for, and delivered
before a popular audience, and published with very little time for
modification. This will be a sufficient apology for the mistakes which
may occur, and for whatever may have the appearance of severity, irony,
or pleasantry, in the composition.

On the subject of Contractions much more might be said. But verbal
criticisms are rather uninteresting to a common audience; and hence the
consideration of that matter was made more brief than was at first
intended. It will however be resumed and carried out at length in
another work. The hints given will enable the student to form a
tolerable correct opinion of the use of most of those words and phrases,
which have long been passed over with little knowledge of their meaning
or importance.

The author is aware that the principles he has advocated are new and
opposed to established systems and the common method of inculcation. But
the difficulties acknowledged on all hands to exist, is a sufficient
justification of this humble attempt. He will not be condemned for his
good intentions. All he asks is a patient and candid examination, a
frank and honest approval of what is true, and as honest a rejection of
what is false. But he hopes the reader will avoid a rash and precipitate
conclusion, either for or against, lest he is compelled to do as the
author himself once did, approve what he had previously condemned.

With these remarks he enters the arena, and bares himself to receive the
sentence of the public voice.




CONTENTS.


LECTURE I.

GENERAL VIEW OF LANGUAGE.

Study of Language long considered difficult.--Its importance.--Errors
in teaching.--Not understood by Teachers.--Attachment to old
systems.--Improvement preferable.--The subject important.--Its
advantages.--Principles laid down.--Orthography.--Etymology.--Syntax.--
Prosody.


LECTURE II.

THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF LANGUAGE.

General principles of Language.--Business of Grammar.--Children are
Philosophers.--Things, ideas, and words.--Actions.--Qualities of
things.--Words without ideas.--Grammatical terms inappropriate.--
Principles of Language permanent.--Errors in mental science.--Facts
admit of no change.--Complex ideas.--Ideas of qualities.--An
example.--New ideas.--Unknown words.--Signs without things
signified.--Fixed laws regulate matter and mind.


LECTURE III.

WRITTEN AND SPOKEN LANGUAGE.

Principles never alter.--They should be known.--Grammar a most important
branch of science.--Spoken and written Language.--Idea of a thing.--How
expressed.--An example.--Picture writing.--An anecdote.--Ideas expressed
by actions.--Principles of spoken and written Language.--Apply
universally.--Two examples.--English language.--Foreign words.--Words in
science.--New words.--How formed.


LECTURE IV.

ON NOUNS.

Nouns defined.--Things.--Qualities of matter.--Mind.--Spiritual
beings.--Qualities of mind.--How learned.--Imaginary things.--Negation.
--Names of actions.--Proper nouns.--Characteristic names.--Proper nouns
may become common.


LECTURE V.

ON NOUNS AND PRONOUNS.

Nouns in respect to persons.--Number.--Singular.--Plural.--How
formed.--Foreign plurals.--Proper names admit of plurals.--Gender.--No
neuter.--In figurative language.--Errors.--Position or case.--Agents.--
Objects.--Possessive case considered.--A definitive word.--Pronouns.--
One kind.--Originally nouns.--Specifically applied.


LECTURE VI.

ON ADJECTIVES.

Definition of adjectives.--General character.--Derivation.--How
understood.--Defining and describing.--Meaning changes to suit the
noun.--Too numerous.--Derived from nouns.--Nouns and verbs made from
adjectives.--Foreign adjectives.--A general list.--Difficult to
be understood.--An example.--Often superfluous.--Derived from
verbs.--Participles.--Some prepositions.--Meaning unknown.--With.--
In.--Out.--Of.


LECTURE VII.

ON ADJECTIVES.

Adjectives.--How formed.--The syllable _ly_.--Formed from proper nouns.
--The apostrophe and letter _s_.--Derived from pronouns.--Articles.--_A_
comes from _an_.--_In_definite.--_The_.--Meaning of _a_ and _the_.--
Murray's example.--That.--What.--"Pronoun adjectives."--_Mon_,
_ma_.--Degrees of comparison.--Secondary adjectives.--Prepositions admit
of comparison.


LECTURE VIII.

ON VERBS.

Unpleasant to expose error.--Verbs defined.--Every thing acts.--Actor
and object.--Laws.--Man.--Animals.--Vegetables.--Minerals.--Neutrality
degrading.--Nobody can explain a neuter verb.--_One_ kind of
verbs.--_You_ must decide.--Importance of teaching children the
truth.--Active verbs.--Transitive verbs false.--Samples.--Neuter verbs
examined.--Sit.--Sleep.--Stand.--Lie.--Opinion of Mrs. W.--Anecdote.


LECTURE IX.

ON VERBS.

Neuter and intransitive.--Agents.--Objects.--No actions as such can be
known distinct from the agent.--Imaginary actions.--Actions known by
their effects.--Examples.--Signs should guide to things signified.--
Principles of action.--=Power=.--Animals.--Vegetables.--Minerals.--All
things act.--Magnetic needle.--=Cause=.--Explained.--First
Cause.--=Means=.--Illustrated.--Sir I. Newton's example.--These
principles must be known.--=Relative= action.--Anecdote of Gallileo.


LECTURE X.

ON VERBS.

A philosophical axiom.--Manner of expressing action.--Things taken for
granted.--Simple facts must be known.--Must never deviate from the
truth.--Every _cause_ will have an _effect_.--An example of an
intransitive verb.--Objects expressed or implied.--All language
eliptical.--Intransitive verbs examined.--I run.--I walk.--To step.--
Birds fly.--It rains.--The fire burns.--The sun shines.--To smile.--Eat
and drink.--Miscellaneous examples.--Evils of false teaching.--A change
is demanded.--These principles apply universally.--Their importance.


LECTURE XI.

ON VERBS.

The verb =to be=.--Compounded of different radical words.--=Am=.
--Defined.--The name of Deity.--_Ei_.--=Is=.--=Are=.--=Were=,
=was=.--=Be=.--A dialogue.--Examples.--Passive Verbs examined.--Cannot
be in the present tense.--The past participle is an adjective.


LECTURE XII.

ON VERBS.

=Mood=.--Indicative.--Imperative.--Infinitive.--Former distinctions.--
Subjunctive mood.--=Time=.--Past.--Present.--Future.--The future
explained.--How formed.--Mr. Murray's distinction of time.--Imperfect.--
Pluperfect.--Second future.--How many tenses.--=Auxiliary Verbs=.--Will.
--Shall.--May.--Must.--Can.--Do.--Have.


LECTURE XIII.

ON VERBS.

Person and number in the agent, not in the action.--Similarity of
agents, actions, and objects.--Verbs made from nouns.--Irregular
verbs.--Some examples.--Regular Verbs.--_Ed_.--_Ing_.--Conjugation of
verbs.--To love.--To have.--To be.--The indicative mood varied.--A whole
sentence may be agent or object.--Imperative mood.--Infinitive mood.--Is
always future.


LECTURE XIV.

ON CONTRACTIONS.

A temporary expedient.--Words not understood.--All words must have a
meaning.--Their formation.--Changes of meaning and form.--Should be
observed.--=Adverbs=.--Ending in _ly_.--Examples.--Ago.--Astray.--Awake.
--Asleep.--Then, when.--There, where, here.--While, till.--Whether,
together.--Ever, never, whenever, etc.--Oft.--Hence.--Perhaps.--Not.
--Or.--Nor.--Than.--As.--So.--Conjunctions.--Rule 18.--If.--But.--Tho.
--Yet.




LECTURES ON LANGUAGE.




LECTURE I.

GENERAL VIEW OF LANGUAGE.

    Study of Language long considered difficult.--Its importance.--Errors
    in teaching.--Not understood by Teachers.--Attachment to old
    systems.--Improvement preferable.--The subject important.--Its
    advantages.--Principles laid down.--Orthography.--Etymology.--
    Syntax.--Prosody.


LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,

It is proposed to commence, this evening, a course of Lectures on the
Grammar of the English Language. I am aware of the difficulties
attending this subject, occasioned not so much by any fault in itself,
as by the thousand and one methods adopted to teach it, the multiplicity
of books pretending to "simplify" it, and the vast contrariety of
opinion entertained by those who profess to be its masters. By many it
has been considered a needless affair, an unnecessary appendage to a
common education; by others, altogether beyond the reach of common
capacities; and by all, cold, lifeless, and uninteresting, full of
doubts and perplexities, where the wisest have differed, and the firmest
often changed opinions.

All this difficulty originates, I apprehend, in the wrong view that is
taken of the subject. The most beautiful landscape may appear at great
disadvantage, if viewed from an unfavorable position. I would be slow to
believe that the means on which depends the whole business of the
community, the study of the sciences, all improvement upon the past, the
history of all nations in all ages of the world, social intercourse,
oral or written, and, in a great measure, the knowledge of God, and the
hopes of immortality, can be either unworthy of study, or, if rightly
explained, uninteresting in the acquisition. In fact, on the principles
I am about to advocate, I have seen the deepest interest manifested,
from the small child to the grey-headed sire, from the mere novice to
the statesman and philosopher, and all alike seemed to be edified and
improved by the attention bestowed upon the subject.

I confess, however, that with the mention of _grammar_, an association
of ideas are called up by no means agreeable. The mind involuntarily
reverts to the days of childhood, when we were compelled, at the risk of
our bodily safety, to commit to memory a set of arbitrary rules, which
we could neither understand nor apply in the correct use of language.
Formerly it was never dreamed that grammar depended on any higher
authority than the books put into our hands. And learners were not only
dissuaded, but strictly forbidden to go beyond the limits set them in
the etymological and syntactical rules of the authors to whom they were
referred. If a query ever arose in their minds, and they modestly
proposed a plain question as to the _why_ and _wherefore_ things were
thus, instead of giving an answer according to common sense, in a way to
be understood, the authorities were pondered over, till some rule or
remark could be found which would apply, and this settled the matter
with "proof as strong as holy writ." In this way an end may be put to
the inquiry; but the thinking mind will hardly be satisfied with the
mere opinion of another, who has no evidence to afford, save the
undisputed dignity of his station, or the authority of books. This
course is easily accounted for. Rather than expose his own ignorance,
the teacher quotes the printed ignorance of others, thinking, no doubt,
that folly and nonsense will appear better second-handed, than fresh
from his own responsibility. Or else on the more common score, that
"misery loves company."

Teachers have not unfrequently found themselves placed in an unenviable
position by the honest inquiries of some thinking urchin, who has
demanded why "_one noun governs_ another in the possessive case," as
"master's slave;" why there are more tenses than _three_; what is meant
by a _neuter_ verb, which "signifies neither action nor passion;" or an
"intransitive verb," which expresses the highest possible action, but
terminates on no object; a cause without an effect; why _that_ is
sometimes a pronoun, sometimes an adjective, and not unfrequently a
conjunction, &c. &c. They may have succeeded, by dint of official
authority, in silencing such inquiries, but they have failed to give a
satisfactory answer to the questions proposed.

Long received opinions may, in some cases, become law, pleading no other
reason than antiquity. But this is an age of investigation, which
demands the most lucid and unequivocal proof of the point assumed. The
dogmatism of the schoolmen will no longer satisfy. The dark ages of
mental servility are passing away. The day light of science has long
since dawned upon the world, and the noon day of truth, reason, and
virtue, will ere long be established on a firm and immutable basis. The
human mind, left free to investigate, will gradually advance onward in
the course of knowledge and goodness marked out by the Creator, till it
attains to that perfection which shall constitute its highest glory, its
truest bliss.

You will perceive, at once, that our inquiries thro out these lectures
will not be bounded by what has been said or written on the subject. We
take a wider range. We adopt no sentiment because it is ancient or
popular. We refer to no authority but what proves itself to be correct.
And we ask no one to adopt our opinions any farther than they agree with
the fixed laws of nature in the regulation of matter and thought, and
apply in common practice among men.

Have we not a right to expect, in return, that you will be equally
honest to yourselves and the subject before us? So far as the errors of
existing systems shall be exposed, will you not reject them, and adopt
whatever appears conclusively true and practically useful? Will you, can
you, be satisfied to adopt for yourselves and teach to others, systems
of grammar, for no other reason than because they are old, and claim the
support of the learned and honorable?

Such a course, generally adopted, would give the ever-lasting quietus to
all improvement. It would be a practical adoption of the philosophy of
the Dutchman, who was content to carry his grist in one end of the sack
and a stone to balance it in the other, assigning for a reason, that his
honored father had always done so before him. Who would be content to
adopt the astrology of the ancients, in preferance to astronomy as now
taught, because the latter is more modern? Who would spend three years
in transcribing a copy of the Bible, when a better could be obtained
for one dollar, because manuscripts were thus procured in former times?
What lady would prefer to take her cards, wheel, and loom, and spend a
month or two in manufacturing for herself a dress, when a better could
be earned in half the time, merely because her respected grandmother did
so before her? Who would go back a thousand years to find a model for
society, rejecting all improvements in the arts and sciences, because
they are innovations, encroachments upon the opinions and practices of
learned and honorable men?

I can not believe there is a person in this respected audience whose
mind is in such voluntary slavery as to induce the adoption of such a
course. I see before me minds which sparkle in every look, and thoughts
which are ever active, to acquire what is true, and adopt what is
useful. And I flatter myself that the time spent in the investigation of
the science of language will not be unpleasant or unprofitable.

I feel the greater confidence from the consideration that your minds are
yet untrammeled; not but what many, probably most of you, have already
studied the popular systems of grammar, and understood them; if such a
thing is possible; but because you have shown a disposition to learn, by
becoming members of this Institute, the object of which is the
improvement of its members.

Let us therefore make an humble attempt, with all due candor and
discretion, to enter upon the inquiry before us with an unflinching
determination to push our investigations beyond all reasonable doubt,
and never rest satisfied till we have conquered all conquerable
obstacles, and come into the possession of the light and liberty of
truth.

The attempt here made will not be considered unimportant, by those who
have known the difficulties attending the study of language. If any
course can be marked out to shorten the time tediously spent in the
acquisition of what is rarely attained--a thoro knowledge of language--a
great benefit will result to the community; children will save months
and years to engage in other useful attainments, and the high
aspirations of the mind for truth and knowledge will not be curbed in
its first efforts to improve by a set of technical and arbitrary rules.
They will acquire a habit of thinking, of deep reflection; and never
adopt, for fact, what appears unreasonable or inconsistent, merely
because great or good men have said it is so. They will feel an
independence of their own, and adopt a course of investigation which
cannot fail of the most important consequences. It is not the saving of
time, however, for which we propose a change in the system of teaching
language. In this respect, it is the study of one's life. New facts are
constantly developing themselves, new combinations of ideas and words
are discovered, and new beauties presented at every advancing step. It
is to acquire a knowledge of correct principles, to induce a habit of
correct thinking, a freedom of investigation, and at that age when the
character and language of life are forming. It is, in short, to exhibit
before you truth of the greatest practical importance, not only to you,
but to generations yet unborn, in the most essential affairs of human
life, that I have broached the hated subject of grammar, and undertaken
to reflect light upon this hitherto dark and disagreeable subject.

With a brief sketch of the outlines of language, as based on the fixed
laws of nature, and the agreement of those who employ it, I shall
conclude the present lecture.

We shall consider all language as governed by the invariable laws of
nature, and as depending on the conventional regulations of men.

Words are the signs of ideas. Ideas are the impressions of things.
Hence, in all our attempts to investigate the important principles of
language, we shall employ the sign as the means of coming at the thing
signified.

Language has usually been considered under four divisions, viz.:
Orthography, Etymology, Syntax, and Prosody.

Orthography is _right spelling_; the combination of certain letters into
words in such a manner as to agree with the spoken words used to denote
an idea. We shall not labor this point, altho we conceive a great
improvement might be effected in this department of learning. My only
wish is to select from all the forms of spelling, the most simple and
consistent. Constant changes are taking place in the method of making
words, and we would not refuse to cast in our mite to make the standard
more correct and easy. We would prune off by degrees all unnecessary
appendages, as unsounded or italic letters, and write out words so as to
be capable of a distinct pronunciation. But this change must be
_gradually_ effected. From the spelling adopted two centuries ago, a
wonderful improvement has taken place. And we have not yet gone beyond
the possibility of improvement. Let us not be too sensitive on this
point, nor too tenacious of old forms. Most of our dictionaries differ
in many respects in regard to the true system of orthography, and our
true course is to adopt every improvement which is offered. Thro out
this work we shall spell some words different from what is customary,
but intend not, thereby, to incur the ignominy of bad spellers. Let
small improvements be adopted, and our language may soon be redeemed
from the difficulties which have perplexed beginners in their first
attempts to convey ideas by written words.[1]

In that department of language denominated Etymology, we shall contend
that all words are reducible to two general classes, nouns and verbs;
or, _things_ and _actions_. We shall, however, admit of subdivisions,
and treat of pronouns, adjectives, and contractions. We shall contend
for only two cases of nouns, one kind of pronouns, one kind of verbs,
that all are active; three modes, and as many tenses; that articles,
adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions, and interjections, have no
distinctive character, no existence, in fact, to warrant a "local
habitation or a name."

In the composition of sentences, a few general rules of Syntax may be
given; but the principal object to be obtained, is the possession of
correct ideas derived from a knowledge of things, and the most approved
words to express them; the combination of words in a sentence will
readily enough follow.

Prosody relates to the quantity of syllables, rules of accent and
pronunciation, and the arrangement of syllables and words so as to
produce harmony. It applies specially to versification. As our object is
not to make poets, who, it is said, "are born, and not made," but to
teach the true principles of language, we shall give no attention to
this finishing stroke of composition.

In our next we shall lay before you the principles upon which all
language depends, and the process by which its use is to be acquired.




LECTURE II.

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF LANGUAGE.

    General principles of Language.--Business of Grammar.--Children are
    Philosophers.--Things, ideas, and words.--Actions.--Qualities
    of things.--Words without ideas.--Grammatical terms inappropriate.--
    Principles of Language permanent.--Errors in mental science.--Facts
    admit of no change.--Complex ideas.--Ideas of qualities.--An
    example.--New ideas.--Unknown words.--Signs without things
    signified.--Fixed laws regulate matter and mind.


All language depends on two general principles.

_First._ The fixed and unvarying laws of nature which regulate matter
and mind.

_Second._ The agreement of those who use it.

In accordance with these principles all language must be explained. It
is not only needless but impossible for us to deviate from them. They
remain the same in all ages and in all countries. It should be the
object of the grammarian, and of all who employ language in the
expression of ideas, to become intimately acquainted with their use.

It is the business of grammar to explain, not only verbal language, but
also the sublime principles upon which all written or spoken language
depends. It forms an important part of physical and mental science,
which, correctly explained, is abundantly simple and extensively useful
in its application to the affairs of human life and the promotion of
human enjoyment.

It will not be contended that we are assuming a position beyond the
capacities of learners, that the course here adopted is too philosophic.
Such is not the fact. Children are philosophers by nature. All their
ideas are derived from things as presented to their observations. No
mother learns her child to lisp the name of a thing which has no being,
but she chooses objects with which it is most familiar, and which are
most constantly before it; such as father, mother, brother, sister.

She constantly points to the object named, that a distinct impression
may be made upon its mind, and the thing signified, the idea of the
thing, and the name which represents it, are all inseparably associated
together. If the father is absent, the child may _think_ of him from the
idea or impression which his person and affection has produced in the
mind. If the mother pronounces his _name_ with which it has become
familiar, the child will start, look about for the object, or thing
signified by the _name_, father, and not being able to discover him,
will settle down contented with the _idea_ of him deeply impressed on
the mind, and as distinctly understood as if the father was present in
person. So with every thing else.

Again, after the child has become familiar with the name of the being
called father; the name, idea and object itself being intimately
associated the mother will next begin to teach it another lesson;
following most undeviatingly the course which nature and true philosophy
mark out. The father comes and goes, is present or absent. She says on
his return, father _come_, and the little one looks round to see the
thing signified by the word father, the idea of which is distinctly
impressed on the mind, and which it now sees present before it. But this
loved object has not always been here. It had looked round and called
for the father. But the mother had told it _he was gone_. Father gone,
father come, is her language, and here the child begins to learn ideas
of actions. Of this it had, at first, no notion whatever, and never
thought of the father except when his person was present before it, for
no impressions had been distinctly made upon the mind which could be
called up by a sound of which it could have no conceptions whatever. Now
that it has advanced so far, the idea of the father is retained, even
tho he is himself absent, and the child begins to associate the notion
of coming and going with his presence or absence. Following out this
course the mind becomes acquainted with things and actions, or the
changes which things undergo.

Next, the mother begins to learn her offspring the distinction and
qualities of things. When the little sister comes to it in innocent
playfulness the mother says, "_good_ sister," and with the descriptive
word _good_ it soon begins to associate the quality expressed by the
affectionate regard, of its sister. But when that sister strikes the
child, or pesters it in any way, the mother says "_naughty_ sister,"
"bad sister." It soon comprehends the descriptive words, _good_ and
_bad_, and along with them carries the association of ideas which such
conduct produces. In the same way it learns to distinguish the
difference between _great_ and _small_, _cold_ and _hot_, hard and soft.

In this manner the child becomes acquainted with the use of language. It
first becomes acquainted with things, the idea of which is left upon the
mind, or, more properly, the _impression of which_, left on the mind,
_constitutes the idea_; and a vocabulary of words are learned, which
represent these ideas, from which it may select those best calculated
to express its meaning whenever a conversation is had with another.

You will readily perceive the correctness of our first proposition, that
all language depends on the fixed and unerring laws of nature. Things
exist. A knowledge of them produces ideas in the mind, and sounds or
signs are adopted as vehicles to convey these ideas from one to another.

It would be absurd and ridiculous to suppose that any person, however
great, or learned, or wise, could employ language correctly without a
knowledge of the things expressed by that language. No matter how chaste
his words, how lofty his phrases, how sweet the intonations, or mellow
the accents. It would avail him nothing if _ideas_ were not represented
thereby. It would all be an unknown tongue to the hearer or reader. It
would not be like the loud rolling thunder, for that tells the wondrous
power of God. It would not be like the soft zephyrs of evening, the
radiance of the sun, the twinkling of the stars; for they speak the
intelligible language of sublimity itself, and tell of the kindness and
protection of our Father who is in heaven. It would not be like the
sweet notes of the choral songsters of the grove, for they warble hymns
of gratitude to God; not like the boding of the distant owl, for that
tells the profound solemnity of night; not like the hungry lion roaring
for his prey, for that tells of death and plunder; not like the distant
notes of the clarion, for that tells of blood and carnage, of tears and
anguish, of widowhood and orphanage. It can be compared to nothing but a
Babel of confusion in which their own folly is worse confounded. And
yet, I am sorry to say it, the languages of all ages and nations have
been too frequently perverted, and compiled into a heterogeneous mass
of abstruse, metaphysical volumes, whose only recommendation is the
elegant bindings in which they are enclosed.

And grammars themselves, whose pretended object is to teach the rules of
speaking and writing correctly, form but a miserable exception to this
sweeping remark. I defy any grammarian, author, or teacher of the
numberless systems, which come, like the frogs of Egypt, all of one
genus, to cover the land, to give a reasonable explanation of even the
terms they employ to define their meaning, if indeed, meaning they have.
What is meant by an "_in_-definite article," a _dis_-junctive
_con_-junction, an _ad_-verb which qualifies an _adjective_, and
"sometimes another _ad_-verb?" Such "parts of speech" have no existence
in fact, and their adoption in rules of grammar, have been found
exceedingly mischievous and perplexing. "Adverbs and conjunctions," and
"_adverbial_ phrases," and "conjunctive expressions," may serve as
common sewers for a large and most useful class of words, which the
teachers of grammar and lexicographers have been unable to explain; but
learners will gain little information by being told that such is an
_adverbial phrase_, and such, a _conjunctive expression_. This is an
easy method, I confess, a sort of wholesale traffic, in parsing
(_passing_) language, and may serve to cloak the ignorance of the
teachers and makers of grammars. But it will reflect little light on the
principles of language, or prove very efficient helps to "speak or write
with propriety." Those who _think_, will demand the _meaning_ of these
words, and the reason of their use. When that is ascertained, little
difficulty will be found in giving them a place in the company of
respectable words. But I am digressing. More shall be said upon this
point in a future lecture, and in its proper place.

I was endeavoring to establish the position that all language depends
upon permanent principles; that words are the signs of ideas, and ideas
are the impressions of things communicated to the mind thro the medium
of some one of the five senses. I think I have succeeded so far as
simple material things are concerned, to the satisfaction of all who
have heard me. It may, perhaps, be more difficult for me to explain the
words employed to express complex ideas, and things of immateriality,
such as mind, and its attributes. But the rules previously adopted will,
I apprehend, apply with equal ease and correctness in this case; and we
shall have cause to admire the simple yet sublime foundation upon which
the whole superstructure of language is based.

In pursuing this investigation I shall endeavor to avoid all abstruse
and metaphysical reasoning, present no wild conjectures, or vain
hypotheses; but confine myself to plain, common place matter of fact. We
have reason to rejoice that a wonderful improvement in the science and
cultivation of the mind has taken place in these last days; that we are
no longer puzzled with the strange phantoms, the wild speculations which
occupied the giant minds of a Descartes, a Malebranch, a Locke, a Reid,
a Stewart, and hosts of others, whose shining talents would have
qualified them for the brightest ornaments of literature, real
benefactors of mankind, had not their education lead them into dark and
metaphysical reasonings, a continued tissue of the wildest vagaries, in
which they became entangled, till, at length, they were entirely lost in
the labyrinth of their own conjectures.

The occasion of all their difficulty originated in an attempt to
investigate the faculties of the mind without any means of getting at
it. They did not content themselves with an adoption of the principles
which lay at the foundation of all true philosophy, viz., that the
facts to be accounted for, _do exist_; that truth is eternal, and we are
to become acquainted with it by the means employed for its development.
They quitted the world of materiality they inhabited, refused to examine
the development of mind as the effect of an existing cause; and at one
bold push, entered the world of thought, and made the unhallowed attempt
to reason, a priori, concerning things which can only be known by their
manifestations. But they soon found themselves in a strange land,
confused with sights and sounds unknown, in the _explanation_ of which
they, of course, choose terms as unintelligible to their readers, as the
_ideal realities_ were to them. This course, adopted by Aristotle, has
been too closely followed by those who have come after him.[2] But a new
era has dawned upon the philosophy of the mind, and a corresponding
change in the method of inculcating the principles of language must
follow.[3]

In all our investigations we must take things as we find them, and
account for them as far as we can. It would be a thankless task to
attempt a change of principles in any thing. That would be an
encroachment of the Creator's rights. It belongs to mortals to use the
things they have as not abusing them; and to Deity to regulate the laws
by which those things are governed. And that man is the wisest, the
truest philosopher, and brightest Christian, who acquaints himself with
those laws as they do exist in the regulation of matter and mind, in the
promotion of physical and moral enjoyment, and endeavors to conform to
them in all his thoughts and actions.

From this apparent digression you will at once discover our object. We
must not endeavor to change the principles of language, but to
understand and explain them; to ascertain, as far as possible, the
actions of the mind in obtaining ideas, and the use of language in
expressing them. We may not be able to make our sentiments understood;
but if they are not, the fault will originate in no obscurity in the
facts themselves, but in our inability either to understand them or the
words employed in their expression. Having been in the habit of using
words with either no meaning or a wrong one, it may be difficult to
comprehend the subject of which they treat. A man may have a quantity of
sulphur, charcoal, and nitre, but it is not until he learns their
properties and combinations that he can make gunpowder. Let us then
adopt a careful and independent course of reasoning, resolved to meddle
with nothing we do not understand, and to use no words until we know
their meaning.

A complex idea is a combination of several simple ones, as a tree is
made up of roots, a trunk, branches, twigs, and leaves. And these again
may be divided into the wood, the bark, the sap, &c. Or we may employ
the botanical terms, and enumerate its external and internal parts and
qualities; the whole anatomy and physiology, as well as variety and
history of trees of that species, and show its characteristic
distinctions; for the mind receives a different impression on looking at
a maple, a birch, a poplar, a tamarisk, a sycamore, or hemlock. In this
way complex ideas are formed, distinct in their parts, but blended in a
common whole; and, in conformity with the law regulating language,
words, sounds or signs, are employed to express the complex whole, or
each distinctive part. The same may be said of all things of like
character. But this idea I will illustrate more at large before the
close of this lecture.

First impressions are produced by a view of material things, as we have
already seen; and the notion of action is obtained from a knowledge of
the changes these things undergo. The idea of quality and definition is
produced by contrast and comparison. Children soon learn the difference
between a sweet apple and a sour one, a white rose and a red one, a hard
seat and a soft one, harmonious sounds and those that are discordant, a
pleasant smell and one that is disagreeable. As the mind advances, the
application is varied, and they speak of a sweet rose, changing from
_taste_ and _sight_ to smell, of a sweet song, of a hard apple, &c.
According to the qualities thus learned, you may talk to them
intelligibly of the _sweetness_ of an apple, the _color_ of a rose, the
_hardness_ of iron, the _harmony_ of sounds, the _smell_ or scent of
things which possess that quality. As these agree or disagree with their
comfort, they will call them _good_ or _bad_, and speak of the qualities
of goodness and badness, as if possessed by the thing itself.

In this apparently indiscriminate use of words, the ideas remain
distinct; and each sign or object calls them up separately and
associates them together, till, at length, in the single object is
associated all the ideas entertained of its size, qualities, relations,
and affinities.

In this manner, after long, persevering toil, principles of thought are
fixed, and a foundation laid for the whole course of future thinking and
speaking. The ideas become less simple and distinct. Just as fast as the
mind advances in the knowledge of things, language keeps pace with the
ideas, and even goes beyond them, so that in process of time a single
term will not unfrequently represent a complexity of ideas, one of which
will signify a whole combination of things.

On the other hand, there are many instances where the single declaration
of a fact may convey to the untutored mind, a single thought or nearly
so, when the better cultivated will take into the account the whole
process by which it is effected. To illustrate: _a man killed a deer_.
Here the boy would see and imagine more than he is yet fully able to
comprehend. He will see the obvious fact that the man levels his musket,
the gun goes off with a loud report, and the deer falls and dies. How
this is all produced he does not understand, but knowing the fact he
asserts the single truth--the man killed the deer. As the child
advances, he will learn that the sentence conveys to the mind more than
he at first perceived. He now understands how it was accomplished. The
man had a gun. Then he must go back to the gunsmith and see how it was
made, thence back to the iron taken from its bed, and wrought into bars;
all the processes by which it is brought into the shape of a gun, the
tools and machinery employed; the wood for the stock, its quality and
production; the size, form and color of the lock, the principle upon
which it moves; the flint, the effect produced by a collision with the
steel, or a percussion cap, and its composition; till he finds a single
gun in the hands of a man. The man is present with this gun. The motives
which brought him here; the movements of his limbs, regulated by the
determinations of the mind, and a thousand other such thoughts, might be
taken into the account. Then the deer, his size, form, color, manner of
living, next may claim a passing thought. But I need not enlarge. Here
they both stand. The man has just seen the deer. As quick as thought his
eye passes over the ground, sees the prey is within proper distance,
takes aim, pulls the trigger, that loosens a spring, which forces the
flint against the steel; this produces a spark, which ignites the
charcoal, and the sulphur and nitre combined, explode and force the wad,
which forces the ball from the gun, and is borne thro the air till it
reaches the deer, enters his body by displacing the skin and flesh,
deranges the animal functions, and death ensues. The whole and much more
is expressed in the single phrase, "a man killed a deer."

It would be needless for me to stop here, and examine all the operations
of the mind in coming at this state of knowledge. That is not the object
of the present work. Such a duty belongs to another treatise, which may
some day be undertaken, on logic and the science of the mind. The hint
here given will enable you to perceive how the mind expands, and how
language keeps pace with every advancing step, and, also, how
combinations are made from simple things, as a house is made of timber,
boards, shingles, nails, and paints; or of bricks, stone, and mortar; as
the case may be, and when completed, a single term may express the
idea, and you speak of a wood, or a brick house. Following this
suggestion, by tracing the operations of the mind in the young child, or
your own, very minutely, in the acquisition of any knowledge before
wholly unknown to you, as a new language, or a new science; botany,
mineralogy, chemistry, or phrenology; you will readily discover how the
mind receives new impressions of things, and a new vocabulary is adopted
to express the ideas formed of plants, minerals, chemical properties,
and the development of the capacities of the mind as depending on
material organs; how these things are changed and combined; and how
their existence and qualities, changes and combinations, are expressed
by words, to be retained, or conveyed to other minds.

But suppose you talk to a person wholly unacquainted with these things,
will he understand you? Talk to him of stamens, pistils, calyxes; of
monandria, diandria, triandria; of gypsum, talc, calcareous spar,
quartz, topaz, mica, garnet, pyrites, hornblende, augite, actynolite; of
hexahedral, prismatic, rhomboidal, dodecahedral; of acids and alkalies;
of oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon; of the configuration of the
brain, and its relative powers; do all this, and what will he know of
your meaning? So of all science. Words are to be understood from the
things they are employed to represent. You may as well talk to a man in
the hebrew, chinese, or choctaw languages, as in our own, if he does not
know what is signified by the words selected as the medium of thought.

Your language may be most pure, perfect, full of meaning, but you cannot
make yourself understood till your hearers can look thro your signs to
the things signified. You may as well present before them a picture of
_nothing_.

The great fault in the popular system of education is easily accounted
for, particularly in reference to language. Children are taught to study
signs without looking at the thing signified. In this way they are mere
copyists, and the mind can never expand so as to make them independent,
original thinkers. In fact, they can, in this way, never learn to reason
well or employ language correctly; no more than a painter can be
successful in his art, by merely looking at the pictures of others
without having ever seen the originals. A good artist is a close
observer of nature. So children should be left free to examine and
reflect, and the signs will then serve their proper use--the means of
acquiring the knowledge of things. In vain you may give a scholar a
knowledge of the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, learn him to translate with
rapidity or speak our own language fluently. If he has not thereby
learned the knowledge of things signified by such language, he is, in
principle, advanced no farther than the parrot which says "pretty poll,
pretty poll."

I am happy, however, in the consideration that a valuable change is
taking place in this respect. Geography is no longer taught on the old
systems, but maps are given to represent more vividly land and water,
rivers, islands, and mountains. The study of arithmetic, chemistry, and
nearly all the sciences have been materially improved within a few
years. Grammar alone remains in quiet possession of its unquestioned
authority. Its nine "parts of speech," its three genders, its three
cases, its half dozen kinds of pronouns, and as many moods and tenses,
have rarely been disquieted. A host of book makers have fondled around
them, but few have dared molest them, finding them so snugly ensconced
under the sanctity of age, and the venerated opinions of learned and
good men. Of the numberless attempts to simplify grammar, what has been
the success? Wherein do modern "simplifiers" differ from Murray? and he
was only a _compiler_! They have all discovered his errors. But who has
corrected them? They have all deviated somewhat from his manner. But
what is that but saying, that with all his grammatical knowledge, he
could not explain his own meaning?

All the trouble originates in this; the rules of grammar have not been
sought for where they are only to be found, in the laws that govern
matter and thought. Arbitrary rules have been adopted which will never
apply in practice, except in special cases, and the attempt to bind
language down to them is as absurd as to undertake to chain thought, or
stop the waters of Niagara with a straw. Language will go on, and keep
pace with the mind, and grammar should explain it so as to be correctly
understood.

I wish you to keep these principles distinctly in view all thro my
remarks, that you may challenge every position I assume till proved to
be correct--till you distinctly understand it and definite impressions
are made upon your minds. In this way you will discover a beauty and
perfection in language before unknown; its rules will be found few and
simple, holding with most unyielding tenacity to the sublime principles
upon which they depend; and you will have reason to admire the works and
adore the character of the great Parent Intellect, whose presence and
protection pervade all his works and regulate the laws of matter and
mind. You will feel yourselves involuntarily filled with sentiments of
gratitude for the gift of mind, its affections, powers, and means of
operation and communication, and resolved more than ever to employ these
faculties in human improvement and the advancement of general happiness.




LECTURE III.

WRITTEN AND SPOKEN LANGUAGE.

    Principles never alter.--They should be known.--Grammar a most
    important branch of science.--Spoken and written Language.--Idea
    of a thing.--How expressed.--An example.--Picture writing.--An
    anecdote.--Ideas expressed by actions.--Principles of spoken and
    written Language.--Apply universally.--Two examples.--English
    language.--Foreign words.--Words in science.--New words.--How
    formed.


We now come to take a nearer view of language as generally understood by
grammar. But we shall have no occasion to depart from the principles
already advanced, for there is existing in practice nothing which may
not be accounted for in theory; as there can be no effect without an
efficient cause to produce it.

We may, however, long remain ignorant of the true explanation of the
principles involved; but the fault is ours, and not in the things
themselves. The earth moved with as much grandeur and precision around
its axis and in its orbit before the days of Gallileo Gallilei, when
philosophers believed it flat and stationary, as it has done since. So
the great principles on which depends the existence and use of all
language are permanent, and may be correctly employed by those who have
never examined them; but this does not prove that to be ignorant is
better than to be wise. We may have taken food all our days without
knowing much of the process by which it is converted into nourishment
and incorporated into our bodies, without ever having heard of
delutition chymification, chylification, or even digestion, as a whole;
but this is far from convincing me that the knowledge of these things is
unimportant, or that ignorance of them is not the cause of much disease
and suffering among mankind. And it is, or should be, the business of
the physiologist to explain these things, and show the great practical
benefit resulting from a general knowledge of them. So the grammarian
should act as a sort of physiologist of language. He should analyze all
its parts and show how it is framed together to constitute a perfect
whole.

Instead of exacting of you a blind submission to a set of technical
expressions, and arbitrary rules, I most urgently exhort you to
continue, with unremitting assiduity, your inquiries into the reason and
propriety of the positions which may be taken. It is the business of
philosophy, not to meddle with things to direct how they should be, but
to account for them and their properties and relations as they are. So
it is the business of grammar to explain language as it exists in use,
and exhibit the reason why it is used thus, and what principles must be
observed to employ it correctly in speaking and writing. This method is
adopted to carry out the principles already established, and show their
adaptation to the wants of the community, and how they may be correctly
and successfully employed. Grammar considered in this light forms a
department in the science of the mind by no means unimportant. And it
can not fail to be deeply interesting to all who would employ it in the
business, social, literary, moral, or religious concerns of life. Those
who have thoughts to communicate, or desire an acquaintance with the
minds of others, can not be indifferent to the means on which such
intercourse depends. I am convinced, therefore, that you will give me
your most profound attention as I pursue the subject of the present
lecture somewhat in detail. And I hope you will not consider me tedious
or unnecessarily prolix in my remarks.

I will not be particular in my remarks upon the changes of spoken and
written language, altho that topic of itself, in the different sounds
and signs employed in different ages and by different nations to express
the same idea, would form a most interesting theme for several lectures.
But that work must be reserved for a future occasion. You are all
acquainted with the signs, written and spoken, which are employed in our
language as vehicles (some of them like omnibusses) of thought to carry
ideas from one mind to another. Some of you doubtless are acquainted
with the application of this fact in other languages. In other words,
you know how to sound the name of a thing, how to describe its
properties as far as you understand them, and its attitudes or changes.
This you can do by vocal sounds, or written, or printed signs.

On the other hand, you can receive a similar impression by hearing the
description of another, or by seeing it written or printed. But here you
will bear in mind the fact that the word, spoken or written, is but the
sign of the idea derived from the thing signified. For example: Here is
an apple. I do not now speak of its composition, the skin, the pulp,
&c.; nor of its qualities, whether sour, or sweet, or bitter, good or
bad, great or small, long or short, round or flat, red, or white, or
yellow. I speak of a single thing--an apple. Here it is, present before
you. Look at it. It is now removed. You do not see it. Your minds are
occupied with something else, in looking at that organ, or this
representation of Solomon's temple, or, perhaps, lingering in melancholy
review of your old systems of grammar thro which you plodded at a
tedious rate, goaded on by the stimulus of the ferule, or the fear of
being called ignorant. From that unhappy reverie I recal your minds, by
saying _apple_. An apple? where? There is none in sight. No; but you
have distinct recollections of a single object I just now held before
you. You see it, mentally, and were you painters you might paint its
likeness. What has brought this object so vividly before you? The single
sound _apple_. This sound has called up the idea produced in your mind
on looking at this object which I now again present before you. Here is
the thing represented--the apple. Again I lay it aside, and commence a
conversation with you on the varieties of apples, the form, color,
flavor, manner of production, their difference from other fruit, where
found, when, and by whom. Here! look again. What do you see?
A-P-P-L-E--_Apple_. What is that? The representation of the idea
produced in the mind by a certain object you saw a little while ago.
Here then you have the spoken and written signs of this single object I
now again present to your vision. This idea may also be called up by the
sense of feeling, smelling, or tasting, under certain restrictions. Here
you would be no more liable to be mistaken than by seeing. We can indeed
imagine things which would feel, and smell, and taste, and look some
like an apple, but it falls to the lot of more abstruse reasoners to
make their suppositions, and then account for them--to imagine things,
and then treat of them as realities. We are content with the knowledge
of things as they do exist, and think there is little danger of
mistaking a potato for an apple, or a squash for a pear. Tho in the dark
we may lay hold of the Frenchman's _pomme de terre_--apple of the earth,
the first bite will satisfy us of our mistake if we are not too
metaphysical.

The same idea may be called up in your minds by a picture of the apple
presented to your sight. On this ground the picture writing of the
ancients may be accounted for; and after that, the hieroglyphics of
Egypt and other countries, which was but a step from picture writing
towards the use of the alphabet. But these signs or vehicles for the
conveyance or transmission of their thoughts, compared with the present
perfect state of language, were as aukward and uncomly as the carriages
employed for the conveyance of their bodies were compared with those now
in use. They were like ox carts drawn by mules, compared with the most
splendid barouches drawn by elegant dapple-greys.

A similar mode would be adopted now by those unacquainted with
alphabetical writing. It was so with the merchant who could not write.
He sold his neighbor a grindstone, on trust. Lest he should forget
it--lest the _idea_ of it should be obliterated from the mind--he, in
the absence of his clerk, took his book and a pen and drew out a _round
picture_ to represent it. Some months after, he dunned his neighbor for
his pay for a cheese. "I have bought no cheese of you," was the reply.
Yes, you have, for I have it charged. "You must be mistaken, for I never
bought a cheese. We always make our own." How then should I have one
charged to you? "I cannot tell. I have never had any thing here on
credit except a grindstone." Ah! that's it, that's it, only I forgot to
make a hole through it!"

Ideas may also be exchanged by actions. This is the first and strongest
language of nature. It may be employed, when words have failed, in the
most effectual manner. The angry man, choked with rage, unable to speak,
tells the violent passions, burning in his bosom, in a language which
can not be mistaken. The actions of a friend are a surer test of
friendship than all the honied words he may utter. Actions speak louder
than words. The first impressions of maternal affection are produced in
the infant mind by the soothing attentions of the mother. In the same
way we may understand the language of the deaf and dumb. Certain motions
express certain ideas. These being duly arranged and conformed to our
alphabetic signs, and well understood, the pupil may become acquainted
with book knowledge as well as we. They go by sight and not by sound. A
different method is adopted with the blind. Letters with them are so
arranged that they can _feel_ them. The signs thus felt correspond with
the sounds they hear. Here they must stop. They cannot see to describe.
Those who are so unfortunate as to be blind and deaf, can have but a
faint knowledge of language, or the ideas of others.

On similar principles we may explain the pantomime plays sometimes
performed, where the most entertaining scenes of love and murder are
represented, but not a word spoken.

Three things are always to be born in mind in the use and study of all
language: 1st, the thing signified; 2d, the idea of the thing; and 3d,
the word or sign chosen to represent it.

_Things_ exist.

Thinking beings conceive _ideas of things_.

Those who employ language adopt _sounds or signs to convey those ideas_
to others.

On these obvious principles rest the whole superstructure of all
language, spoken or written. Objects are presented to the mind,
impressions are there made, which, retained, constitute the idea, and,
by agreement, certain words are employed as the future signs or
representations of those ideas. If we saw an object in early life and
knew its _name_, the mention of that name will recal afresh the idea
which had long lain dormant in the memory, (if I may so speak,) and we
can converse about it as correctly as when we first saw it.

These principles, I have said, hold good in all languages. Proof of this
may not improperly be offered here, provided it be not too prolix. I
will endeavor to be brief.

In an open area of sufficient dimensions is congregated a delegation
from every language under heaven. All are so arranged as to face a
common center. A white horse is led into that spot and all look at the
living animal which stands before them. The same impression must be made
on all minds so far as a single animal is concerned. But as the whole is
made up of parts, so their minds will soon diverge from a single idea,
and one will think of his size, compared with other horses; another of
his form; another of his color. Some will think of his noble appearance,
others of his ability to travel, or (in jockey phrase) his _speed_. The
farrier will look for his blemishes, to see if he is _sound_, and the
jockey at his teeth, to _guess_ at his _age_. The anatomist will, in
thought, dissect him into parts and see every bone, sinew, cartilage,
blood vessel, his stomach, lungs, liver, heart, entrails; every part
will be laid open; and while the thoughtless urchin sees a single
object--a white horse--others will, at a single glance, read volumes of
instruction. Oh! the importance of knowledge! how little is it
regarded! What funds of instruction might be gathered from the lessons
every where presented to the mind!

One impression would be made on all minds in reference to the single
tangible object before them; no matter how learned or ignorant. There
stands an animal obvious to all. Let him be removed out of sight, and a
very exact picture of him suspended in his place. All again agree. Here
then is the proof of our first general principle, viz. all language
depends on the fixed and unvarying laws of nature.

Let the picture be removed and a man step forth and pronounce the word,
_ippos_. The Greek starts up and says, "Yes, it is so." The rest do not
comprehend him. He then writes out distinctly, [Greek: IPPOS]. They are
in the dark as to the meaning. They know not whether a horse, a man, or
a goose is named. All the Greeks, however, understand the meaning the
same as when the horse or picture was before them, for they had _agreed_
that _ippos_ should represent the _idea_ of that animal.

Forth steps another, and pronounces the word _cheval_. Every Frenchman
is aroused: Oui, monsieur? Yes, sir. Comprenez vous? Do you understand?
he says to the rest. But they are dumb. He then writes C-H-E-V-A-L. All
are as ignorant as before, save the Frenchmen who had agreed that
_cheval_ should be the name for horse.

Next go yourself, thinking all will understand you, and say, _horse_;
but, lo! none unacquainted with your language are the wiser for the
sound you utter, or the sign you suspended before them; save, perhaps, a
little old Saxon, who, at first looks deceived by the similarity of
sound, but, seeing the sign, is as demure as ever, for he omits the _e_,
and pronounces it shorter than we do, more like a yorkshire man. But
why are you not understood? Because others have not entered into an
_agreement_ with you that _h-o-r-s-e_, spoken or written, shall
represent that animal.

Take another example. Place the living animal called man before them.
Less trouble will be found in this case than in the former, for there is
a nearer agreement than before in regard to the signs which shall be
employed to express the idea. This word occurs with very little
variation in the modern languages, derived undoubtedly from the
Teutonic, with a little change in the spelling, as Saxon _mann_ or
_mon_, Gothic _manna_, German, Danish, Dutch, Swedish and Icelandic
like ours. In the south of Europe, however, this word varies as well as
others.

Our language is derived more directly from the old Saxon than from any
other, but has a great similarity to the French and Latin, and a kind of
cousin-german to all the languages of Europe, ancient and modern. Ours,
indeed, is a compound from most other languages, retaining some of their
beauties and many of their defects. We can boast little distinctive
character of our own. As England was possessed by different nations at
different periods, so different dialects were introduced, and we can
trace our language to as many sources, German, Danish, Saxon, French,
and Roman, which were the different nations amalgamated into the British
empire. We retain little of the real old english--few words which may
not be traced to a foreign extraction. Different people settling in a
country would of course carry their ideas and manner of expressing them;
and from the whole compound a general agreement would, in process of
time, take place, and a uniform language be established. Such is the
origin and condition of our language, as well as every other modern
tongue of which we have any knowledge.

There is one practice of which our savans are guilty, at which I do most
seriously demur--the extravagant introduction of exotic words into our
vocabulary, apparently for no other object than to swell the size of a
dictionary, and boast of having found out and defined thousands of words
more than any body else. A mania seems to have seized our
lexicographers, so that they have forsaken the good old style of
"plainness of speech," and are flourishing and brandishing about in a
cloud of verbiage as though the whole end of instruction was to teach
loquacity. And some of our popular writers and speakers have caught the
infection, and flourish in borrowed garments, prizing themselves most
highly when they use words and phrases which no body can understand.

I will not contend that in the advancement of the arts and sciences it
may not be proper to introduce foreign terms as the mean of conveying a
knowledge of those improvements to others. It is better than to coin new
words, inasmuch as they are generally adopted by all modern nations. In
this way all languages are approximating together; and when the light of
truth, science, and religion, has fully shone on all the nations, we may
hope one language will be spoken, and the promise be fulfilled, that God
has "turned unto the people a pure language, that they may call upon the
name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent."

New ideas are formed like new inventions. Established principles are
employed in a new combination, so as to produce a new manifestation.
Words are chosen as nearly allied to former ideas as possible, to
express or represent this new combination. Thus, Fulton applied steam
power to navigation. A new idea was produced. A boat was seen passing
along the waters without the aid of wind or tide. Instead of coining a
new word to express the whole, a word which nobody would understand, two
old ones were combined, and "_steamboat_" became the sign to represent
the idea of the thing beheld. So with rail-road, cotton-mill, and
gun-powder. In the same way we may account for most words employed in
science, although in that case we are more dependant on foreign
languages, in as much as a large portion of our knowledge is derived
from them. But we may account for them on the same principle as above.
_Phrenology_ is a compound of two greek words, and means the science or
knowledge of the mind. So of geology, mineralogy, &c. But when
improvements are made by those who speak the english, words in our own
language are employed and used not only by ourselves, but also by those
nations who profit by our investigations.

I trust I have now said enough on the general principles of language as
applied to things. In the next lecture I will come down to a sort of
bird's eye view of grammar. But my soul abhors arbitrary rules so
devoutly, I can make no promises how long I will continue in close
communion with set forms of speech. I love to wander too well to remain
confined to one spot, narrowed up in the limits fixed by others. Freedom
is the empire of the mind; it abjures all fetters, all slavery. It
kneels at the altar of virtue and worships at the shrine of truth. No
obstacles should be thrown in the way of its progress. No limits should
be set to it but those of the Almighty.




LECTURE IV.

ON NOUNS.

    Nouns defined.--Things.--Qualities of matter.--Mind.--Spiritual
    beings.--Qualities of mind.--How learned.--Imaginary things.--
    Negation.--Names of actions.--Proper nouns.--Characteristic
    names.--Proper nouns may become common.


Your attention is, this evening, invited to the first divisions of
words, called _Nouns_. This is a most important class, and as such
deserves our particular notice.

    _Nouns are the names of things._

The word _noun_ is derived from the Latin _nomen_, French _nom_. It
means _name_. Hence the definition above given.

In grammar it is employed to distinguish that class of words which name
things, or stand as signs or representatives of things.

We use the word _thing_ in its broadest sense, including every possible
entity; every being, or thing, animate or inanimate, material or
immaterial, real or imaginary, physical, moral, or intellectual. It is
the noun of the Saxon _thincan_ or _thingian_, to think; and is used to
express every conceivable object of thought, in whatever form or manner
presented to the human mind.

Every word employed to designate things, or name them, is to be ranked
in the class called _nouns_, or names. You have only to determine
whether a word is used thus, to learn whether it belongs to this or
some other class of words. Here let me repeat:

    1. Things exist.
    2. We conceive ideas of things.
    3. We use sounds or signs to communicate these ideas to others.
    4. We denominate the class of words thus used, _nouns_.

Perhaps I ought to stop here, or pass to another topic. But as these
lectures are intended to be so plain that all can understand my meaning,
I must indulge in a few more remarks before advancing farther.

In addition to individual, tangible objects, we conceive ideas of the
_qualities_ of things, and give _names_ to such qualities, which become
_nouns_. Thus, the _hardness_ of iron, the _heat_ of fire, the _color_
of a rose, the _bitterness_ of gall, the _error_ of grammars. The
following may serve to make my views more plain. Take two tumblers, the
one half filled with water, the other with milk; mix them together. You
can now talk of the milk in the water, or the water in the milk. Your
ideas are distinct, tho the objects are so intimately blended, that they
can not be separated. So with the qualities of things.

We also speak of mind, intellect, soul; but to them we can give no form,
and of them paint no likeness. Yet we have ideas of them, and employ
words to express them, which become _nouns_.

This accounts for the reason why the great Parent Intellect has strictly
forbidden, in the decalogue, that a likeness of him should be
constructed. His being and attributes are discoverable only thro the
medium of his works and word. No man can see him and live. It would be
the height of folly--it would be more--it would be blasphemy--to
attempt to paint the likeness of him whose presence fills
immensity--whose center is every where, and whose circumference is no
where. The name of this Spirit or Being was held in the most profound
reverence by the Jews, as we shall have occasion to mention when we come
to treat of the verb =to be=.

We talk of angels, and have seen the unhallowed attempt to describe
their likeness in the form of pictures, which display the fancy of the
artist very finely, but give a miserable idea of those pure spirits who
minister at the altar of God, and chant his praises in notes of the most
unspeakable delight.

We have also seen _death_ and the pale horse, the firy dragon, the
mystery of Babylon, and such like things, represented on canvass; but
they betoken more of human talent to depict the marvellous, than a
strict regard for truth. Beelzebub, imps, and all Pandemonium, may be
vividly imagined and finely arranged in fiction, and we can name them.
Wizzards, witches, and fairies, may play their sportive tricks in the
human brain, and receive names as tho they were real.

We also think and speak of the qualities and affections of the mind as
well as matter, as wisdom, knowledge, virtue, vice, love, hatred, anger.
Our conceptions in this case may be less distinct, but we have ideas,
and use words to express them. There is, we confess, a greater liability
to mistake and misunderstand when treating of mind and its qualities,
than of matter. The reason is evident, people know less of it. Its
operations are less distinct and more varying.

The child first sees material objects. It is taught to name them. It
next learns the qualities of things; as the sweetness of sugar, the
darkness of night, the beauty of flowers. From this it ascends by
gradation to the higher attainments of knowledge as revealed in the
empire of mind, as well as matter. Great care should be taken that this
advancement be easy, natural, and thoro. It should be constantly
impressed with the importance of obtaining clear and definite ideas of
things, and never employ words till it has ideas to express; never name
a thing of which it has no knowledge. This is ignorance.

It would be well, perhaps, to extend this remark to those older than
children, in years, but less in real practical knowledge. The remark is
of such general application, that no specification need be made, except
to the case before us; to those affected proficients in grammar, whose
only knowledge is the memory of words, which to them have no meanings,
if, indeed, the writers themselves had any to express by them; a fact we
regard as questionable, at best. There is hardly a teacher of grammar,
whose self-esteem is not enormous, who will not confess himself ignorant
on many of the important principles of language; that he has never
understood, and could never explain them. He finds no difficulty in
repeating what the books say, but if called upon to express an opinion
of his own, he has none to give. He has learned and used words without
knowing their meaning.

Children should be taught language as they are taught music. They should
learn the simple tones on which the whole science depends. Distinct
impressions of sounds should be made on their minds, and the characters
which represent them should be inseparably associated with them. They
will then learn tunes from the compositions of those sounds, as
represented by notes. By dint of application, they will soon become
familiar with these principles, if possessed of a talent for song, and
may soon pass the acme with ease, accuracy, and rapidity. But there are
those who may sing very prettily, and tolerably correct, who have never
studied the first rudiments of music. But such can never become adepts
in the science.

So there are those who use language correctly, who never saw the inside
of a grammar book, and who never examined the principles on which it
depends. But this, by no means, proves that it is better to sing by
rote, than "with the understanding." These rudiments, however, should
form the business of the nursery, rather than the grammar school. Every
mother should labor to give distinct and forcible impressions of such
things as she learns her children to _name_. She should carefully
prevent them from employing words which have no meaning, and still more
strictly should she guard them against attaching a wrong meaning to
those they do use. In this way, the foundation for future knowledge and
eminence, would be laid broad and deep. But I wander.

We attach names to imaginary things; as ghosts, genii, imps.

To this class belong the thirty thousand gods of the ancients, who were
frequently represented by emblems significant of the characters attached
to them. We employ words to name these imaginary things, so that we read
and converse about them understandingly, tho our ideas may be
exceedingly various.

Nouns are also used to express negation, of which no idea can be formed.
In this case, the mind rests on what exists, and employs a word to
express what does not. We speak of _a hole_ in the paper. But we can
form no idea of _a hole_, separated from the surrounding substances.
Remove the parts of the paper till nothing is left, and then you may
look in vain for the hole. It is not there. It never was. In the same
way we use the words nothing, nobody, nonentity, vacuum, absence, space,
blank, annihilation, and oblivion. These are relative terms, to be
understood in reference to things which are known to exist. We must know
of _some_thing before we can talk of _no_thing, of an entity before we
can think of nonentity.

In a similar way we employ words to name actions, which are produced by
the changes of objects. We speak of a race, of a flight, of a sitting or
session, of a journey, of a ride, of a walk, of a residence, etc. In all
these cases, the mind is fixed on the persons who performed these
things. Take for example, a race. Of that, we can conceive no idea
separate from the agent or object which _ran_ the _race_. Without some
other word to inform us we could not decide whether a _horse_ race, a
_foot_ race, a boat race, the race of a mill, or some other race, was
the object of remark. The same may be said of flight, for we read of the
flight of birds, the flight of Mahommed, the flight of armies, and the
flight of intellect.

We also give names to actions as tho they were taking place in the
present tense. "The _reading_ of the report was deferred;" steamboat
_racing_ is dangerous to public safety; _stealing_ is a crime; false
_teaching_ deserves the reprobation of all.

The hints I have given will assist you in acquiring a knowledge of nouns
as used to express ideas in vocal or written language. This subject
might be pursued further with profit, if time would permit. As the time
allotted to this lecture is nearly exhausted, I forbear. I shall
hereafter have occasion to show how a whole phrase may be used to name
an idea, and as such stand as the agent or object of a verb.

Some nouns are specifically used to designate certain objects, and
distinguish them from the class to which they usually belong. In this
way they assume a distinctive character, and are usually denominated
=proper nouns=. They apply to persons, places and things; as, John
Smith, Boston, Hylax. _Boy_ is applied in common to all young males of
the human species, and as such is a _common noun_ or name. _John Smith_
designates a particular boy from the rest.

Proper names may be also applied to animals and things. The stable
keeper and stageman has a name for every horse he owns, to distinguish
it from other horses; the dairyman for his cows, the boy for his dog,
and the girl for her doll. Any word, in fact, may become a proper name
by being specifically used; as the ship Fair Trader, the brig Success,
sloop Delight in Peace, the race horse Eclipse, Black Hawk, Round Nose,
and Red Jacket.

Proper names were formerly used in reference to certain traits of
character or circumstances connected with the place or thing. _Abram_
was changed to _Abraham_, the former signifying _an elevated father_,
the latter, _the father of a multitude_. _Isaac_ signified _laughter_,
and was given because his mother laughed at the message of the angel.
_Jacob_ signified _a supplanter_, because he was to obtain the
birthright of his elder brother.

A ridiculous rage obtained with our puritan fathers to express scripture
sentiments in the names of their children, as may be seen by consulting
the records of the Plymouth and Massachusetts colonies.

This practice has not wholly gone out of use in our day, for we hear of
the names of Hope, Mercy, Patience, Comfort, Experience, Temperance,
Faith, Deliverance, Return, and such like, applied usually to females,
(being more in character probably,) and sometimes to males. We have also
the names of White, Black, Green, Red, Gray, Brown, Olive, Whitefield,
Blackwood, Redfield, Woodhouse, Stonehouse, Waterhouse, Woodbridge,
Swiftwater, Lowater, Drinkwater, Spring, Brooks, Rivers, Pond, Lake,
Fairweather, Merryweather, Weatherhead, Rice, Wheat, Straw, Greatrakes,
Bird, Fowle, Crow, Hawks, Eagle, Partridge, Wren, Goslings, Fox, Camel,
Zebra, Bear, Wolf, Hogg, Rain, Snow, Haile, Frost, Fogg, Mudd, Clay,
Sands, Hills, Valley, Field, Stone, Flint, Silver, Gould, and Diamond.

Proper nouns may also become common when used as words of general
import; as, _dunces_, corrupted from Duns Scotus, a distinguished
theologian, born at Dunstane, Northumberland, an opposer of the
doctrines of Thomas Aquinus. He is a real _solomon_, jack tars, judases,
antichrist, and so on.

Nouns may also be considered in respect to person, number, gender, and
positive, or case. There are _three_ persons, _two_ numbers, _two_
genders, and _two_ cases. But the further consideration of these things
will be deferred, which, together with Pronouns, will form the subject
of our next lecture.




LECTURE V.

ON NOUNS AND PRONOUNS.

    Nouns in respect to persons.--Number.--Singular.--Plural.--How
    formed.--Foreign plurals.--Proper names admit of plurals.--Gender.
    --No neuter.--In figurative language.--Errors.--Position or case.--
    Agents.--Objects.--Possessive case considered.--A definitive
    word.--Pronouns.--One kind.--Originally nouns.--Specifically
    applied.


We resume the consideration of nouns this evening, in relation to
person, number, gender, and position or case.

In the use of language there is a speaker, person spoken to, and things
spoken of. Those who speak are the _first_ persons, those who hear the
_second_, and those who are the subject of conversation the _third_.

The first and second persons are generally used in reference to human
beings capable of speech and understanding. But we sometimes condesend
to hold converse with animals and inanimate matter. The bird trainer
talks to his parrots, the coachman to his horses, the sailor to the
winds, and the poet to his landscapes, towers, and wild imaginings, to
which he gives a "local habitation and a name."

By metaphor, language is put into the mouths of animals, particularly in
fables. By a still further license, places and things, flowers, trees,
forests, brooks, lakes, mountains, towers, castles, stars, &c. are made
to speak the most eloquent language, in the first person, in addresses
the most pathetic. The propriety of such a use of words I will not stop
to question, but simply remark that such figures should never be
employed in the instruction of children. As the mind expands, no longer
content to grovel amidst mundane things, we mount the pegasus of
imagination and soar thro the blissful or terrific scenes of fancy and
fiction, and study a language before unknown. But it would be an
unrighteous demand upon others, to require them to understand us; and
quite as unpardonable to brand them with ignorance because they do not.

Most nouns are in the third person. More things are talked about than
talk themselves, or are talked to by others. Hence there is little
necessity for teaching children to specify except in the first or second
person, which is very easily done.

In English there are two _numbers_, singular and plural. The singular is
confined to one, the plural is extended to any indefinite number. The
Greeks, adopted a dual number which they used to express two objects
united in pairs, or couples; as, a span of horses, a yoke of oxen, a
brace of pistols, a pair of shoes. We express the same idea with more
words, using the singular to represent the union of the two. We also
extend this use of words and employ what are called _nouns of
multitude_; as, a people, an army, a host, a nation. These and similar
words are used in the singular referring to many combined in a united
whole, or in the plural comprehending a diversity; as, "the armies met,"
"the nations are at peace." _People_ admits no change on account of
number. We say "_many_ people are collected together and form _a_
numerous people."

The plural is not always to be understood as expressing an increase of
number, but of qualities or sorts of things, as the merchant has a
variety of _sugars_, _wines_, _teas_, _drugs_, _medicines_, _paints_ and
_dye-woods_. We also speak of _hopes_, _fears_, _loves_, _anxieties_.

Some nouns admit of no plural, in fact, or in use; as, chaos, universe,
fitness, immortality, immensity, eternity. Others admit of no singular;
as, scissors, tongs, vitals, molasses. These words probably once had
singulars, but having no use for them they became obsolete. We have long
been accustomed to associate the two halves of shears together, so that
in speaking of one whole, we say shears, and of apart, half of a shears.
But of some words originally, and in fact plural, we have formed a
singular; as, "one twin died, and, tho the other one survived its
dangerous illness, the mother wept bitterly for her twins." _Twin_ is
composed of _two_ and _one_. It is found in old books, spelled _twane_,
two-one, or twin. Thus, the _twi_-light is formed by the mingling of two
lights, or the division of the rays of light by the approaching or
receding darkness. They _twain_ shall be one flesh. Sheep and deer are
singular or plural.

Most plurals are formed by adding _s_ to the singular, or, when euphony
requires it, _es_; as, tree, trees; sun, suns; dish, dishes; box, boxes.
Some retain the old plural form; as, ox, oxen; child, children; chick,
chicken; kit, kitten. But habit has burst the barrier of old rules, and
we now talk of chicks and chickens, kits and kittens. _Oxen_ alone
stands as a monument raised to the memory of unaltered saxon plurals.

Some nouns form irregular plurals. Those ending in _f_ change that
letter to _v_ and then add _es_; as, half, halves; leaf, leaves; wolf,
wolves. Those ending in _y_ change that to _i_ and add the _es_; as,
cherry, cherries; berry, berries; except when the _y_ is preceded by a
vowel, in which case it only adds the _s_; as, day, days; money, moneys
(not _ies_); attorney, attorneys. All this is to make the sound more
easy and harmonious. _F_ and _v_ were formerly used indiscriminately, in
singulars as well as plurals, and, in fact, in the composition of all
words where they occurred. The same may be said of _i_ and _y_.

    "The Fader (Father) Almychty of the heven abuf (above)
    In the mene tyme, unto Juno his _luf_ (love)
    Thus spak; and sayd."
                              _Douglas, booke 12, pag. 441._

    "They lyued in ioye and in felycite
    For eche of hem had other lefe and dere."
                              _Chaucer, Monks Tale, fol. 81, p. 1._

    "When straite twane beefes he tooke
    And an the aultar layde."

The reason why _y_ is changed into _i_ in the formation of plurals, and
in certain other cases, is, I apprehend, accounted for from the fact
that words which now end in _y_ formerly ended in _ie_, as may be seen
in all old books. The regular plural was then formed by adding _s_.

"And upon those members of the _bodie_, which _wee_ thinke most
unhonest, put _wee_ more honestie on." "It rejoyceth not in
iniquitie--diversitie of gifts--all thinges edifie not." See old bible,
1 Cor., chap. 13 and 14.

Other words form their plurals still more differently, for which no
other rule than habit can be given; as, man, men; foot, feet; tooth,
teeth; die, dice; mouse, mice; penny, pence, and sometimes pennies, when
applied to distinct pieces of money, and not to value.

Many foreign nouns retain the plural form as used by the nations from
whom we have borrowed them; as, cherub, cherubim; seraph, seraphim;
radius, radii; memorandum, memoranda; datum, data, &c. We should be
pleased to have such words carried home, or, if they are ours by virtue
of possession, let them be adopted into our family, and put on the
garments of naturalized citizens, and no longer appear as lonely
strangers among us. There is great aukwardness in adding the english to
the hebrew plural of cherub, as the translators of the common version of
the bible have done. They use _cherub_ in the singular and cherub_ims_
in the plural. The _s_ should be omitted and the Hebrew plural retained,
or the preferable course adopted, and the final _s_ be added, making
cherubs, seraphs, &c. The same might be said of all foreign nouns. It
would add much to the regularity, dignity, and beauty, of our vernacular
tongue.

Proper nouns admit of the plural number; as, there are sixty-four John
Smiths in New-York, twenty Arnolds in Providence, and fifteen Davises in
Boston. As we are not accustomed to form the plurals of proper names
there is not that ease and harmony in the first use of them that we have
found in those with which we are more familiar; especially those we have
rarely heard pronounced. Habit surmounts the greatest obstacles and
makes things the most harsh and unpleasant appear soft and agreeable.

Gender is applied to the distinction of the sexes. There are
two--masculine and feminine. The former is applied to males, the latter
to females. Those words which belong to neither gender, have been called
_neuter_, that is, _no gender_. But it is hardly necessary to perplex
the minds of learners with _negatives_. Let them distinguish between
masculine and feminine genders, and little need be said to them about a
_neuter_.

There are some nouns of both genders, as student, writer, pupil,
person, citizen, resident. _Poet_, _author_, editor, and some other
words, have of late been applied to females, instead of poet_ess_,
author_ess_, edit_ress_. Fashion will soon preclude the necessity of
this former distinction.

Some languages determine their genders by the form of the endings of
their nouns, and what is thus made masculine in Rome, may be feminine in
France. It is owing, no doubt, to this practice, in other nations, that
we have attached the idea of gender to inanimate things; as, "the sun,
_he_ shines majestically;" while of the moon, it is said, "_she_ sheds a
milder radiance." But we can not coincide with the reason assigned by
Mr. Murray, for this distinction. His notion is not valid. It does not
correspond with facts. While in the south of Europe the sun is called
masculine and the moon feminine, the northern nations invariably reverse
the distinction, particularly the dialects of the Scandinavian. It was
so in our own language in the time of Shakspeare. He calls the sun a
"_fair wench_."

By figures of rhetoric, genders may be attached to inanimate matter.
Where things are personified, we usually speak of them as masculine and
feminine; but this practice depends on fancy, and not on any fixed
rules. There is, in truth, but two genders, and those confined to
animals. When we break these rules, and follow the undirected wanderings
of fancy, we can form no rules to regulate our words. We may have as
many fanciful ones as we please, but they will not apply in common
practice. For example: poets and artists have usually attached female
loveliness to angels, and placed them in the feminine gender. But they
are invariably used in the masculine thro out the scriptures.

There is an apparent absurdity in saying of the ship General Williams,
_she_ is beautiful; or, of the steamboat Benjamin Franklin, _she_ is out
of date. It were far better to use no gender in such cases. But if
people will continue the practice of making distinctions where there are
none, they must do it from habit and whim, and not from any reason or
propriety.

There are three ways in which we usually distinguish the forms of words
in reference to gender. 1st. By words which are different; as boy, girl;
uncle, aunt; father, mother. 2d. By a different termination of the same
word; as instructor, instructress; lion, lioness; poet, poetess. _Ess_
is a contraction from the hebrew _essa_, a female. 3d. By prefixing
another word; as, a male child, a female child; a man servant, a maid
servant; a he-goat, a she-goat.

The last consideration that attaches to nouns, is the _position_ they
occupy in written or spoken language, in relation to other words, as
being _agents_, or _objects_ of action. This is termed _position_.

There are two positions in which nouns stand in reference to their
meaning and use. First, as _agents_ of action, as _David_ killed
Goliath. Second, as _objects_ on which action terminates; as, _Richard_
conquered _Henry_. These two distinctions should be observed in the use
of all nouns. But the propriety of this division will be more evident
when we come to treat of verbs, their agents and objects.

It will be perceived that we have abandoned the use of the "_possessive
case_," a distinction which has been insisted on in our grammars; and
also changed the names of the other two. As we would adopt nothing that
is new without first being convinced that something is needed which the
thing proposed will supply; so we would reject nothing that is old,
till we have found it useless and cumbersome. It will be admitted on all
hands that the fewer and simpler the rules of grammar, the more readily
will they be understood, and the more correctly applied. We should
guard, on the one hand, against having so many as to perplex, and on the
other, retain enough to apply in the correct use of language. It is on
this ground that we have proposed an improvement in the names and number
of cases, or positions.

The word noun signifies name, and _nominative_ is the adjective derived
from noun, and partakes of the same meaning. Hence the _nominative_ or
_naming_ case may apply as correctly to the object as the agent. "_John_
strikes _Thomas_, and _Thomas_ strikes _John_." John and Thomas name the
boys who strike, but in the first case John is the actor or agent and
Thomas the object. In the latter it is changed. To use a _nominative
name_ is a redundancy which should be avoided. You will understand my
meaning and see the propriety of the change proposed, as the mind of the
learner should not be burthened with needless or irrelevant phrases.

But our main objection lies against the "possessive case." We regard it
as a false and unnecessary distinction. What is the possessive case?
Murray defines it as "expressing the relation of property or possession;
as, my father's house." His rule of syntax is, "one substantive governs
another, signifying a different thing, in the possessive or genitive
case; as, my father's house." I desire you to understand the definition
and use as here given. Read it over again, and be careful that you know
the meaning of _property_, _possession_, and _government_. Now let a
scholar parse correctly the example given. "_Father's_" is a common
noun, third person, singular number, masculine gender, and _governed_ by
house:" Rule, "One noun _governs_ another," &c. Then my father does not
govern his own house, but his house him! What must be the conduct and
condition of the family, if they have usurped the government of their
head? "John Jones, hatter, keeps constantly for sale all kinds of _boy's
hats_. Parse boy's. It is a noun, possessive case, _governed_ by hats."
What is the possessive case? It "signifies the _relation of property or
possession_." Do the hats belong to the boys? Oh no. Are they the
_property_ or in the _possession_ of the boys? Certainly not. Then what
relation is there of property or possession? None at all. They belong to
John Jones, were made by him, are his property, and by him are
advertised for sale. He has used the word _boy's_ to distinguish their
size, quality, and fitness for boy's use.

"The master's slave." Master's is in the possessive case, and _governed_
by slave! If grammars are true there can be no need of abolition
societies, unless it is to look after the master and see that he is not
abused. The rider's horse; the captain's ship; the general's army; the
governor's cat; the king's subject. How false it would be to teach
scholars the idea of _property_ and _government_ in such cases. The
_teacher's scholars_ should never learn that by virtue of their
grammars, or the _apostrophe_ and letter _s_, they have a right to
_govern_ their teachers; nor the mother's son, to govern his mother. Our
merchants would dislike exceedingly to have the _ladies_ understand them
to signify by their advertisements that the "ladies' merino shawls, the
ladies's bonnets and lace wrought veils, the ladies' gloves and elegant
Thibet, silk and challa dresses, were the _property_ of the ladies; for
in that case they might claim or _possess_ themselves of their
_property_, and no longer trouble the merchant with the care of it.

"Peter's wife's mother lay sick of a fever." "_His_ physician said that
_his_ disease would require _his_ utmost skill to defeat _its_ progress
in _his_ limbs." Phrases like these are constantly occurring, which can
not be explained intelligibly by the existing grammars. In fact, the
words said to be nouns in the possessive case, have changed their
character, by use, from nouns to adjectives, or definitive words, and
should thus be classed. Russia iron, Holland gin, China ware, American
people, the Washington tavern, Lafayette house, Astor house, Hudson
river, (formerly Hudson's,) Baffin's bay, Van Dieman's land, John
street, Harper's ferry, Hill's bridge, a paper book, a bound book, a red
book, John's book--one which John is known to use, it may be a borrowed
one, but generally known as some way connected with him,--Rev. Mr.
Smith's church, St. John's church, Grace church, Murray's grammar; not
the property nor in the possession of Lindley Murray, neither does it
_govern him_; for he has gone to speak a purer language than he taught
on earth. It is mine. I bought it, have possessed it these ten years;
but, thank fortune, am little _governed_ by it. But more on this point
when we come to the proper place. What I have said, will serve as a
hint, which will enable you to see the impropriety of adopting the
"possessive case."

It may be said that more cases are employed in other languages. That is
a poor reason why we should break the barriers of natural language.
Beside, I know not how we should decide by that rule, for none of them
have a _case_ that will compare with the English possessive. The
genitive of the French, Latin, or Greek, will apply in only a few
respects. The former has _three_, the latter five, and the Latin six
cases, neither of which correspond with the possessive, as explained by
Murray and his satellites. We should be slow to adopt into our language
an idiom which does not belong to it, and compel learners to make
distinctions where none exist. It is an easy matter to tell children
that the apostrophe and letter _s_ marks the possessive case; but when
they ask the difference in the meaning between the use of the noun and
those which all admit are adjectives, it will be no indifferent task to
satisfy them. What is the difference in the construction of language or
the sense conveyed, between Hudson'_s_ river, and _Hudson_ river?
Davis's straits, or Bass straits? St. John's church, or Episcopal
church? the sun's beams, or sun shine? In all cases these words are used
to define the succeeding noun. They regard "property or possession,"
only when attending circumstances, altogether foreign from any quality
in the form or meaning of the word itself, are so combined as to give it
that import. And in such cases, we retain these words as adjectives,
long after the property has passed from the hands of the persons who
gave it a name. _Field's_ point, _Fuller's_ rocks, _Fisher's_ island,
_Fulton's_ invention, will long be retained after those whose names were
given to distinguish these things, have slept with their fathers and
been forgotten. Blannerhassett's Island, long since ceased to be his
property or tranquil possession, by confiscation; but it will retain its
specific name, till the inundations of the Ohio's waters shall have
washed it away and left not a wreck behind.

The distinctions I have made in the positions of nouns, will be clearly
understood when we come to the verbs. A few remarks upon pronouns will
close the present lecture.


PRONOUNS.

Pronouns are such as the word indicates. _Pro_ is the latin word _for_;
pro-nomen, _for nouns_. They are words, originally nouns, used
specifically _for_ other nouns, to avoid the too frequent repetition of
the same words; as, Washington was the father of his country; _he_ was a
valiant officer. _We_ ought to respect _him_. The word _we_, stands for
the speaker and all present, and saves the trouble of naming them; _he_
and _him_, stand for Washington, to avoid the monotony which would be
produced by a recurrence of his name.

Pronouns are all of one kind, and few in number. I will give you a list
of them in their respective positions.

                        _Agents._      _Objects._
            { 1st person,  I,             me,
            { 2d    "      thou,          thee,
_Singular_  { 3d    "  mas. { he,         him,
            {       "  fem. { she,        her,
            {              it,            it.

            { 1st person,  we,            us,
 _Plural_   { 2d    "      ye, or you,    you,
            { 3d    "      they,          them,
                           who,           whom.

The two last may be used in either person, number, or gender.

The frequent use of these words render them very important, in the
elegant and rapid use of language. They are so short, and their sound so
soft and easy, that the frequency of their recurrence does not mar the
beauty of a sentence, but saves us from the redundancy of other words.
They are substituted only when there is little danger of mistaking the
nouns for which they stand. They are, however, sometimes used in a very
broad sense; as, "_they say_ it is so;" meaning no particular persons,
but the general sentiment. _It_ frequently takes the lead of a sentence,
and the thing represented by it comes after; as, "It is currently
reported, that things were thus and so." Here _it_ represents the single
idea which is afterward stated at length. "_It_ is so." "_It_ may be
that the nations will be destroyed by wars, earthquakes, and famines."
But more of this when we come to speak of the composition of sentences.

The words now classed as pronouns were originally _names_ of things, but
in this character they have long been obsolete. They are now used only
in their secondary character as the representatives of other words. The
word _he_, for instance, signified originally _to breathe_. It was
applied to the living beings who inhaled air. It occurs with little
change in the various languages of Europe, ancient and modern, till at
length it is applied to the male agent which lives and acts. The word
_her_ means _light_, but is specifically applied to females which are
the objects of action.

Was it in accordance with the design of these lectures, it would give me
pleasure to go into a minute examination of the origin, changes and
meaning of these words till they came to be applied as specific words of
exceeding limited character. Most of them might be traced thro all the
languages of Europe; the Arabic, Persic, Arminian, Chaldean, Hebrew,
and, for ought I know, all the languages of Asia. But as they are now
admitted a peculiar position in the expression of thought from which
they never vary; and as we are contending about philosophic principles
rather than verbal criticisms, I shall forbear a further consideration
of these words.

In the proper place I shall consider those words formerly called
"Adjective Pronouns," "Pronoun Adjectives," or "Pronominal Adjectives,"
to suit the varying whims of those grammar makers, who desired to show
off a speck of improvement in their "simplifying" works without ever
having a new idea to express. It is a query in some minds whether the
seventy-two "simplifiers" and "improvers" of Murray's grammar ever had
any distinct notions in their heads which they did not obtain from the
very man, who, it would seem by their conduct, was unable to explain his
own meaning.




LECTURE VI.

ON ADJECTIVES.

    Definition of adjectives.--General character.--Derivation.--How
    understood.--Defining and describing.--Meaning changes to suit the
    noun.--Too numerous.--Derived from nouns.--Nouns and verbs made from
    adjectives.--Foreign adjectives.--A general list.--Difficult to be
    understood.--An example.--Often superfluous.--Derived from
    verbs.--Participles.--Some prepositions.--Meaning unknown.--With.--
    In.--Out.--Of.


The most important sub-division of words is the class called Adjectives,
which we propose to notice this evening. _Adjective_ signifies _added_
or _joined to_. We employ the term in grammar to designate that class of
words which are _added to nouns to define or describe them_. In doing
this, we strictly adhere to the principles we have already advanced, and
do not deviate from the laws of nature, as developed in the regulation
of speech.

In speaking of things, we had occasion to observe that the mind not only
conceived ideas of things, but of their properties; as, the hardness of
flint; the heat of fire; and that we spoke of one thing in reference to
another. We come now to consider this subject more at large.

In the use of language the mind first rests on the thing which is
present before it, or the word which represents the idea of that thing.
Next it observes the changes and attitudes of these things. Thirdly, it
conceives ideas of their qualities and relations to other things. The
first use of these words is to name things. This we call _nouns_. The
second is to express their actions. This we call _verbs_. The last is to
define or describe things. This we call _adjectives_. There is a great
similarity between the words used to name things and to express their
actions; as, builders build buildings; singers sing songs; writers write
writings; painters paint paintings. In the popular use of language we
vary these words to avoid the monotony and give pleasantness and
variety. We say builders _erect_ houses, barns, and other buildings;
singers perform pieces of music; musicians play tunes; the choir sing
psalm tunes; artists paint pictures.

From these two classes a third is derived which partakes somewhat of the
nature of both, and yet from its secondary use, it has obtained a
distinctive character, and as such is allowed a separate position among
the classes of words.

It might perhaps appear more in order to pass the consideration of
adjectives till we have noticed the character and use of verbs, from
which an important portion of them is derived. But as they are used in
connexion with nouns, and as the character they borrow from the verb
will be readily understood, I have preferred to retain the old
arrangement, and consider them in this place.

_Adjectives are words added to nouns to define or describe them._ They
are derived either, 1st, from nouns; as, _window_ glass, _glass_ window,
a stone house, building stone, maple sugar, sugar cane; or, 2d, from
verbs; as, a _written_ paper, a _printed_ book, a _painted_ house, a
_writing_ desk. In the first case we employ one noun, or the name of one
thing, to define another, thus giving it a secondary use. A _glass_
window is one made of glass, and not of any thing else. It is neither a
_board_ window, nor a _paper_ window. _Maple_ sugar is not _cane_
sugar, nor _beet_ sugar, nor _molasses_ sugar; but it may be _brown_
sugar, if it has been browned, or _white_ if it has been whit_ed_ or
whit_ened_. In this case, you at once perceive the correctness of our
second proposition, in the derivation of adjectives from verbs, by which
we describe a thing in reference to its condition, in some way affected
by the operation of a prior action. A _printed_ book is one on which the
action of printing has been performed. A _written_ book differs from the
former, in as much as its appearance was produced by writing and not by
printing.

In the definition or description of things, whatever is best understood
is employed as a definitive or descriptive term, and is attached to the
object to make known its properties and relations. Speaking of nations,
if we desire to distinguish some from others, we choose the words
supposed to be best known, and talk of European, African, American, or
Indian nations; northern, southern, eastern, or western nations. These
last words are used in reference to their relative position, and may be
variously understood; for we speak of the northern, eastern, western,
and southern nations of Europe, of Africa, and the world.

Again, we read of civiliz_ed_, half-civilized, and barbarous nations;
learned, unlearned, ignorant, and enlightened; rich, powerful,
enterprising, respected, ancient or modern, christian, mahomedan or
pagan. In these, and a thousand similar cases, we decide the meaning,
not alone from the word employed as an adjective, but from the subject
of remark; for, were we to attach the same meaning to the same word,
wherever used, we could not receive correct or definite impressions from
the language of others--our inferences would be the most monstrous. A
_great_ mountain and a _great_ pin, a _great_ continent and a _great_
farm, a _great_ ocean and a _great_ pond, a _great_ grammar and a
_great_ scholar, refer to things of very different dimensions and
character; or, as Mr. Murray would say, "_qualities_." A mountain is
great by comparison with other mountains; and a pin, compared with other
pins, may be very large--exceeding great--and yet fall very far short of
the size of a very small mountain. A _small_ man may be a _great_
scholar, and a rich neighbor a poor friend. A sweet flower is often very
bitter to the taste. A _good_ horse would make a _bad_ dinner, but
_false_ grammar can never make _true_ philologists.

All words are to be understood according to their use. Their meaning can
be determined in no other way. Many words change their forms to express
their relations, but fewer in our language than in most others, ancient
or modern. Other words remain the same, or nearly so, in every position;
noun, adjective, or verb, agent or object, past or present. To determine
whether a word is an adjective, first ascertain whether it names a
thing, defines or describes it, or expresses its action, and you will
never be at a loss to know to what class it belongs.

The business of adjectives is twofold, and they may be distinguished by
the appellations of _defining_ or _describing_ adjectives. This
distinction is in many cases unimportant; in others it is quite
essential. The same word in one case may _define_, in others _describe_
the object, and occasionally do both, for we often specify things by
their descriptions. The learner has only to ascertain the meaning and
use of the adjective to decide whether it defines or describes the
subject of remark. If it is employed to distinguish one thing from the
general mass, or one class from other classes, it has the former
character; but after such thing is pointed out, if it is used to give a
description of its character or properties, its character is different,
and should be so understood and explained.

_Defining adjectives_ are used to _point out_, specify or distinguish
certain things from others of their kind, or one sort from other sorts,
and answer to the questions _which_, _what_, _how many_, or _how much_.

_Describing adjectives_ express the character and qualities of things,
and give a more full and distinct knowledge than was before possessed.

In a case before mentioned, we spoke of the "Indian nations." The word
_Indian_ was chosen to specify or define what nations were alluded to.
But all may not decide alike in this case. Some may think we meant the
aborigines of America; others, that the southern nations of Asia were
referred to. This difficulty originates in a misapprehension of the
definitive word chosen. India was early known as the name of the south
part of Asia, and the people there, were called Indians. When Columbus
discovered the new world, supposing he had reached the country of India,
which had long been sought by a voyage round the coast of Africa, he
named it India, and the people Indians. But when the mistake was
discovered, and the truth fully known, instead of effecting a change in
the name already very generally understood, and in common use, another
word was chosen to distinguish between countries so opposite and _West_
India became the word to distinguish the newly discovered islands; and
as India was little better known in Europe at that time, instead of
retaining their old name unaltered, another word was prefixed, and they
called it _East_ India. When, therefore, we desire to be definite, we
retain these words, and say, East Indians and West Indians. Without this
distinction, we should understand the native people of our own country;
but in Europe, Asia, and Africa, they would think we alluded to those in
Asia. So with all other adjectives which are not understood. _Indian_,
as an adjective, may also be employed to _describe_ the character and
condition of the aborigines. We talk of an indian temper, indian looks,
indian blankets, furs, &c.

In writing and conversation we should employ words to explain, to define
and describe, which are better understood than those things of which we
speak. The pedantry of some modern writers in this respect is
ridiculous. Not satisfied to use plain terms which every body can
understand, they hunt the dictionaries from alpha to omega, and not
unfrequently overleap the "king's english," and ransack other languages
to find an unheard of word, or a list of adjectives never before
arranged together, in so nice a manner, so that their ideas are lost to
the common reader, if not to themselves. This fault may be alleged
against too many of our public speakers, as well as the affected gentry
of the land. They are like Shakspeare's Gratiano, "who speaks an
infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all Venice; his reasons
are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you shall seek
all day ere you find them; and, when you have found them, they are not
worth the search." Such sentences remind us of the painting of the young
artist who drew the form of an animal, but apprehensive that some might
mistake it, wrote under it, "_This is a horse._"

In forming our notions of what is signified by an adjective, the mind
should pause to determine the meaning of such word when used as a
distinct name for some object, in order to determine the import of it in
this new capacity. A _tallow_ candle is one made of a substance called
tallow, and is employed to distinguish it from wax or spermaceti
candles. The adjective in this case, names the article of which the
candle is made, and is thus a noun, but, as we are not speaking of
tallow, but of candles, we place it in a new relation, and give it a new
grammatical character. But you will perceive the correctness of a former
assertion, that all words may be reduced to two classes, and that
adjectives are derived from nouns or verbs.

But you may inquire if there are not some adjectives in use which have
no corresponding verb or noun from which they are derived. There are
many words in our language which in certain uses have become obsolete,
but are retained in others. We now use some words as verbs which
originally were known only as nouns, and others as nouns which are
unknown as verbs. We also put a new construction upon words and make
nouns, verbs and adjectives promiscuously and with little regard to rule
or propriety. Words at one time unknown become familiar by use, and
others are laid aside for those more new or fashionable. These facts are
so obvious that I shall be excused from extending my remarks to any
great length. But I will give an example which will serve as a clew to
the whole. Take the word _happy_, long known only as an adjective.
Instead of following this word _back_ to its primitive use and deriving
it directly from its noun, or as a past participle, such as it is in
truth, we have gone _forward_ and made from it the noun _happiness_,
and, in more modern days, are using the verb _happify_, a word, by the
way, in common use, but which has not yet been honored with a place in
our dictionaries; altho Mr. Webster has given us, as he says, the
_unauthorised_ (un-author-ised) word "_happifying_." Perhaps he had
never heard or read some of our greatest savans, who, if not the
authors, employ the word _happify_ very frequently in the pulpit and
halls of legislation, and at the bar, as well as in common parlance.

_Happy_ is the past participle of the verb _to hap_, or, as afterwards
used, with a nice shade of change in the meaning, _to happen_. It means
_happied_, or made happy by those favorable circumstances which have
_happened_ to us. Whoever will read our old writers no further back than
Shakspeare, will at once see the use and changes of this word. They will
find it in all its forms, simple and compound, as a verb, noun, and
adjective. "It may _hap_ that he will come." It happened as I was going
that I found my lost child, and was thereby made quite happy. The man
desired to _hap_pify himself and family without much labor, so he
engaged in speculation; and _hap_pily he was not so _hap_less in his
pursuit of _hap_piness as often _hap_pens to such _hap_-hazard fellows,
for he soon became very _hap_py with a moderate fortune.

But to the question. There are many adjectives in our language which are
borrowed from foreign words. Instead of _adjectiving_ our own nouns we
go to our neighbors and _adjective_ and anglicise [english-ise] their
words, and adopt the pampered urchins into our own family and call them
our favorites. It is no wonder that they often appear aukward and
unfamiliar, and that our children are slow in forming an intimate
acquaintance with them. You are here favored with a short list of these
words which will serve as examples, and enable you to comprehend my
meaning and apply it in future use. Some of them are regularly used as
adjectives, with or without change; others are not.

    ENGLISH NOUNS.   FOREIGN ADJECTIVES.

    Alone            Sole, solitary
    Alms             Eleemosynary
    Age              Primeval
    Belief           Credulous
    Blame            Culpable
    Breast           Pectoral
    Being            Essential
    Bosom            Graminal, sinuous
    Boy, boyish      Puerile
    Blood, bloody    Sanguinary, sanguine
    Burden           Onerous
    Beginning        Initial
    Boundary         Conterminous
    Brother          Fraternal
    Bowels           Visceral
    Body             Corporeal
    Birth            Natal, native
    Calf             Vituline
    Carcass          Cadaverous
    Cat              Feline
    Cow              Vaccine
    Country          Rural, rustic
    Church           Ecclesiastical
    Death            Mortal
    Dog              Canine
    Day              Diurnal, meridian, ephemeral
    Disease          Morbid
    East             Oriental
    Egg              Oval
    Ear              Auricular
    Eye              Ocular
    Flesh            Carnal, carnivorous
    Father           Paternal
    Field            Agrarian
    Flock            Gregarious
    Foe              Hostile
    Fear             Timorous, timid
    Finger           Digital
    Flattery         Adulatory
    Fire             Igneous
    Faith            Fiducial
    Foot             Pedal
    Groin            Inguinal
    Guardian         Tutelar
    Glass            Vitreous
    Grape            Uveous
    Grief            Dolorous
    Gain             Lucrative
    Help             Auxiliary
    Heart            Cordial, cardiac
    Hire             Stipendiary
    Hurt             Noxious
    Hatred           Odious
    Health           Salutary, salubrious
    Head             Capital, chief
    Ice              Glacial
    Island           Insular
    King             Regal, royal
    Kitchen          Culinary
    Life             Vital, vivid, vivarious
    Lungs            Pulmonary
    Lip              Labial
    Leg              Crural, isosceles
    Light            Lucid, luminous
    Love             Amorous
    Lust             Libidinous
    Law              Legal, loyal
    Mother           Maternal
    Money            Pecuniary
    Mixture          Promiscuous, miscellaneous
    Moon             Lunar, sublunary
    Mouth            Oral
    Marrow           Medulary
    Mind             Mental
    Man              Virile, male, human, masculine
    Milk             Lacteal
    Meal             Ferinaceous
    Nose             Nasal
    Navel            Umbilical
    Night            Nocturnal, equinoctial
    Noise            Obstreperous
    One              First
    Parish           Parochial
    People           Popular, populous, public, epidemical, endemical
    Point            Punctual
    Pride            Superb, haughty
    Plenty           Copious
    Pitch            Bituminous
    Priest           Sacerdotal
    Rival            Emulous
    Root             Radical
    Ring             Annular
    Reason           Rational
    Revenge          Vindictive
    Rule             Regular
    Speech           Loquacious, garrulous, eloquent
    Smell            Olfactory
    Sight            Visual, optic, perspicuous, conspicuous
    Side             Lateral, collateral
    Skin             Cutaneous
    Spittle          Salivial
    Shoulder         Humeral
    Shepherd         Pastoral
    Sea              Marine, maritime
    Share            Literal
    Sun              Solar
    Star             Astral, sideral, stellar
    Sunday           Dominical
    Spring           Vernal
    Summer           Estival
    Seed             Seminal
    Ship             Naval, nautical
    Shell            Testaceous
    Sleep            Soporiferous
    Strength         Robust
    Sweat            Sudorific
    Step             Gradual
    Sole             Venal
    Two              Second
    Treaty           Federal
    Trifle           Nugatory
    Tax              Fiscal
    Time             Temporal, chronical
    Town             Oppidan
    Thanks           Gratuitous
    Theft            Furtive
    Threat           Minatory
    Treachery        Insidious
    Thing            Real
    Throat           Jugular, gutteral
    Taste            Insipid
    Thought          Pensive
    Thigh            Femoral
    Tooth            Dental
    Tear             Lachrymal
    Vessel           Vascular
    World            Mundane
    Wood             Sylvan, savage
    Way              Devious, obvious, impervious, trivial
    Worm             Vermicular
    Whale            Cutaceous
    Wife             Uxorious
    Word             Verbal, verbose
    Weak             Hebdomadal
    Wall             Mural
    Will             Voluntary, spontaneous
    Winter           Brumal
    Wound            Vulnerary
    West             Occidental
    War              Martial
    Women            Feminine, female, effeminate
    Year             Annual, anniversary, perennial, triennial

Such are some of the adjectives introduced into our language from other
nations. The list will enable you to discover that when we have no
adjective of our own to correspond with the noun, we borrow from our
neighbors an adjective derived from one of their nouns, to which we give
an english termination. For example:

    _English Noun._    _Latin Noun._        _Adjective._

    Boy                Puer                 Puerile
    Grief              Dolor                Dolorous
    Thought            Pensa                Pensive
    Wife               Uxor                 Uxorious
    Word               Verbum               Verbal, verbose
    Year               Annum                Annual
    Body               Corpus               Corporeal
    Head               Caput                Capital
    Church             Ekklesia (_Greek_)   Ecclesiastical
    King               Roi (_French_)       Royal
    Law                Loi     "            Loyal

It is exceedingly difficult to understand the adjectives of many nouns
with which we are familiar, from the fact above stated, that they are
derived from other languages, and not our own. The most thoro scholars
have found this task no easy affair. Most grammarians have let it pass
unobserved; but every person has seen the necessity of some explanation
upon this point, to afford a means of ascertaining the etymological
derivation and meaning of these words. I would here enter farther into
this subject, but I am reminded that I am surpassing the limits set me
for this course of lectures.

The attention I have bestowed on this part of the present subject, will
not be construed into a mere verbal criticism. It has been adopted to
show you how, in the definition or description of things, the mind
clings to one thing to gain some information concerning another. When we
find a thing unlike any thing else we have ever known, in form, in size,
in color, in every thing; we should find it a difficult task, if not an
impossibility, to describe it to another in a way to give any correct
idea of it. Having never seen its like before, we can say little of its
character. We may give it a _name_, but that would not be understood. We
could say it was as large as--no, it had no size; that it was like--but
no, it had no likeness; that it resembled--no, it had no resemblance.
How could we describe it? What could we say of it? Nothing at all.

What idea could the Pacha of Egypt form of ice, having never seen any
till the french chemists succeeded in freezing water in his presence?
They told him of ice; that it was _cold_; that it would freeze; that
whole streams were often frozen over, so that men and teams could walk
over them. He believed no such thing--it was a "christian lie." This
idea was confirmed on the first trial of the chemists, which failed of
success. But when, on the second attempt, they succeeded, he was all in
raptures. A new field was open before him. New ideas were produced in
his mind. New qualities were learned; and he could now form some idea of
the _ice_ bergs of the north; of _frozen_ regions, which he had never
seen; of _icy_ hearts, and storms of _frozen_ rain.

We often hear it said, such a man is very _stoical_; another is an
_epicurean_; and another is a _bacchanal_, or _bacchanalian_. But what
idea should we form of such persons, if we had never read of the Stoics
and their philosophy; of Epicurus and his notions of happiness and
duty; or of Bacchus, the god of wine and revelry, whose annual feasts,
or Dionysia, were celebrated with the most extravagant licentiousness
thro out Greece and Rome, till put down by the Senate of the latter.

You can not fail to see the importance of the knowledge on which we here
insist. The meaning you attach to words is exceedingly diverse; and
hence you are not always able to think alike, or understand each other,
nor derive the same sentiment from the same language. The contradictory
opinions which exist in the world may be accounted for, in a great
measure, in this way. Our knowledge of many things of which we speak, is
limited, either from lack of means, or disposition to employ them.
People always differ and contend most about things of which they know
the least. Did we all attach the same meaning to the same words, our
opinions would all be the same, as true as the forty-fifth problem of
Euclid. How important, then, that children should always be taught the
same meaning of words, and learn to use them correctly. Etymology,
viewed in this light, is a most important branch of science.

Whenever a word is sufficiently understood, no adjective should be
connected with it. There is a ridiculous practice among many people, of
appending to every noun one or more adjectives, which have no other
effect than to expose their own folly. Some writers are so in the habit
of annexing adjectives to all nouns, that they dare not use one without.
You will not unfrequently see adjectives different in form, added to a
noun of very similar meaning; as, sad melancholy, an ominous sign, this
mundane earth, pensive thoughts.

When words can be obtained, which not only name the object, but also
describe its properties, it should be preferred to a noun with an
adjective; as _pirate_, for _sea robber_; _savan_, for a _learned_ or
_wise man_.[4]

In relation to that class of adjectives derived from verbs, we will be
brief. They include what have been termed participles, not a distinct
"part of speech," but by some included in the verbs. We use them as
adjectives to describe things as standing in some relation to other
things on the account of the action expressed by the verb from which
they are derived. "The man is respected." _Respected_, in this case,
describes the man in such a relation to those who have become acquainted
with his good qualities, that he now receives their respect. He is
respect_able_, (_able_ to command, or worthy of respect,) and of course,
respected for his respectability. To avoid repetition, we select
different words to assist in the expression of a complex idea. But I
indulge in phrases like the above, to show the nice shades of meaning in
the common use of words, endeavoring to analyze, as far as possible, our
words and thoughts, and show their mutual connexion and dependencies.

What has been termed the "present participle" is also an adjective,
describing things in their present condition in reference to actions.
"The man is writing." Here, _writing_ describes the man in his present
employment. But the consideration of this matter more properly belongs
to the construction of sentences.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is another class or variety of words properly belonging to this
division of grammar, which may as well be noticed in this place as any
other. I allude to those words generally called "Prepositions." We have
not time now to consider them at large, but will give you a brief view
of our opinion of them, and reserve the remainder of our remarks till we
come to another part of these lectures.

Most of the words called prepositions, in books of grammar, are
participles, derived from verbs, many of which are still in use, but
some are obsolete. They are used in the true character of adjectives,
_describing one thing by its relation to another_. But their meaning has
not been generally understood. Our dictionaries have afforded no means
by which we can trace their etymology. They have been regarded as a kind
of cement to stick other words together, having no meaning or importance
in themselves.[5] Until their meaning is known, we can not reasonably
expect to draw them from their hiding places, and give them a
respectable standing in the transmission of thought.

Many words, from the frequency of their use, fail to attract our
attention as much as those less employed; not because they are less
important, but because they are so familiarly known that the operations
of thought are not observed in the choice made of them to express ideas.
If we use words of which little is known, we ponder well before we adopt
them, to determine whether the sense usually attached to them accords
exactly with the notions we desire to convey by them. The same can not
be said of small words which make up a large proportion of our language,
and are, in fact, more necessary than the others, in as much as their
meaning is more generally known. Those who employ carriages to convey
their bodies, observe little of their construction, unless there is
something singular or fine in their appearance. The common parts are
unobserved, yet as important as the small words used in the common
construction of language, the vehicle of thought. As the apostle says of
the body politic, "those members of the body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary;" so the words least understood by grammarians are
most necessary in the correct formation of language.

It is an easy matter to get along with the words called prepositions,
after they are all learned by rote; but when their meaning and use are
inquired into, the best grammarians have little to say of them.

A list of prepositions, alphabetically arranged, is found in nearly
every grammar, which scholars are required to commit to memory, without
knowing any thing of their meaning or use, only that they are
prepositions when an objective word comes after them, _because the books
say so_; but occasionally the same words occur as adverbs and
adjectives. There is, however, no trouble in "parsing" them, unless the
list is forgotten. In that case, you will see the pupil, instead of
inquiring after the meaning and duty of the word, go to the book and
search for it in the lists of prepositions or conjunctions; or to the
dictionary, to see if there is a "_prep._" appended to it. What will
children ever learn of language in this way? Of what avail is all such
grammar teaching? As soon as they leave school it is all forgotten; and
you will hear them say, at the very time they should be reaping the
harvest of former toil, that they once understood grammar, but it is all
gone from them. Poor souls! their memory is very treacherous, else they
have never learned language as they ought. There is a fault somewhere.
To us it is not difficult to determine where it is.

That certain words are prepositions, there can be no doubt, because the
books say they are; but _why_ they are so, is quite another matter. All
we desire is to have their meaning understood. Little difficulty will
then be found in determining their use.

I have said they are derived from verbs, many of which are obsolete.
Some are still in use, both as verbs and nouns. Take for example the
word =with=. This word signifies _joined_ or _united_. It is used to
show that two things are some how joined together so that they are spoke
of in connexion. It frequently occurs in common conversation, as a verb
and noun, but not as frequently in the books as formerly. The farmer
says to his _hired_ man, "Go and get a _withe_ and come and _withe_ up
the fence;" that is, get some pliant twigs of tough wood, twist them
together, and _withe_ or bind them round these posts, so that one may
stand firm _with_, or _withed_ to, the other. A book _with_ a cover, is
one that has a cover _joined_, bound, or attached to it. "A father
_with_ a son, a man _with_ an estate, a nation _with_ a constitution."
In all such cases _with_ expresses the relation between the two things
mentioned, produced by a _union_ or connexion with each other.[6]

=In= is used in the same way. It is still retained as a noun and is
suspended on the signs of many public houses. "The traveller's _inn_,"
is a house where travellers _in_ themselves, or go _in_, for
entertainment. It occurs frequently in Shakspeare and in more modern
writers, as a verb, and is still used in common conversation as an
imperative. "Go, _in_ the crops of grain." "_In_ with you." "_In_ with
it." In describes one thing by its relation to another, which is the
business of adjectives. It admits of the regular degrees of comparison;
as, _in_, _inner_, _innermost_ or _inmost_. It also has its compounds.
_In_step, the _inner_ part of the foot, _in_let, _in_vestment,
_in_heritance. In this capacity it is extensively used under its
different shades of meaning which I cannot stop to notice.

=Of= signifies _divided_, _separated_, or _parted_. "The ship is _off_
the coast." "I am bound _off_, and you are bound _out_." "A part _of_ a
pencil," is that part which is _separated_ from the rest, implying that
the act of _separating_, or _offing_, has taken place. "A branch _of_
the tree." There is the tree; this branch is from it. "Our communication
was broken _off_ several years ago." "Sailors record their _off_ings,
and parents love their _off_spring," or those children which sprung
from them.[7] "We also _are his offspring_;" that is, sprung from
God.[8] In all these, and every other case, you will perceive the
meaning of the word, and its office will soon appear essential in the
expression of thought. Had all the world been a compact whole, nothing
ever separated from it, we could never speak of a part _of_ it, for we
could never have such an idea. But we look at things, as separated,
divided, parted; and speak of one thing as separated from the others.
Hence, when we speak of the part of the earth we inhabit, we, in
imagination, separate it from some other _part_, or the general whole.
We can not use this word in reference to a thing which is indivisible,
because we can conceive no idea of a part _of_ an indivisible thing. We
do not say, a portion _of_ our mind taken as a whole, but as capable of
division. A share _of_ our regards, supposes that the remainder is
reserved for something else.

=Out=, out_er_ or utter, outer_most_ or utmost, admits of the same
remark as _in_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In this manner, we might explain a long list of words, called adverbs,
conjunctions, and prepositions. But I forbear, for the present, the
further consideration of this subject, and leave it for another lecture.




LECTURE VII.

ON ADJECTIVES.

    Adjectives.--How formed.--The syllable _ly_.--Formed from proper
    nouns.--The apostrophe and letter _s_.--Derived from pronouns.--
    Articles.--_A_ comes from _an_.--_In_definite.--_The_.--Meaning of
    _a_ and _the_.--Murray's example.--That.--What.--"Pronoun
    adjectives."--_Mon_, _ma_.--Degrees of comparison.--Secondary
    adjectives.--Prepositions admit of comparison.


We resume the consideration of Adjectives. The importance of this class
of words in the expression of our thoughts, is my excuse for bestowing
upon it so much labor. Had words always been used according to their
primitive meaning, there would be little danger of being misunderstood.
But the fact long known, "_Verba mutanter_"--words change--has been the
prolific source of much of the diversity of opinion, asperity of
feeling, and apparent misconstruction of other's sentiments, which has
disturbed society, and disgraced mankind. I have, in a former lecture,
alluded to this point, and call it up in this place to prepare your
minds to understand what is to be said on the secondary use of words in
the character of adjectives.

I have already spoken of adjectives in general, as derived from nouns
and verbs, and was somewhat particular upon the class sometimes called
_prepositions_, which describe one thing by its relation to another,
produced by some action which has placed them in such relation. We will
now pass to examine a little more minutely into the character and use
of certain adjectives, and the manner of their derivation.

We commence with those derived from nouns, both common and proper, which
are somewhat peculiar in their character. I wish you distinctly to bear
in mind the use of adjectives. They are words _added to nouns to define
or describe them_.

Many words which name things, are used as adjectives, with out change;
as, _ox_ beef, _beef_ cattle, _paper_ books, _straw_ hats, _bonnet_
paper. Others admit of change, or addition; as, nation_al_ character, a
merci_ful_ (mercy-_ful_) man, a gloom_y_ prospect, a fam_ous_ horse, a
gold_en_ ball. The syllables which are added, are parts of words, which
are at first compounded with them, till, by frequency of use, they are
incorporated into the same word. "A merci_ful_ man" is one who is full
of mercy. A gold_en_ ball is one made of gold. This word is sometimes
used without change; as, a _gold_ ring.

A numerous portion of these words take the syllable _ly_, contracted
from _like_, which is still retained in many words; as, Judas-_like_,
lady-_like_, gentleman-_like_. These two last words, are of late,
occasionally used as other words, lady_ly_, gentleman_ly_; but the last
more frequently than the former. She behaved very ladi_ly_, or
lady_like_; and his appearance was quite gentleman_ly_. But to say
ladi_ly_ appearance, does not yet sound quite soft enough; but it is
incorrect only because it is uncommon. God_ly_ and god_like_ are both in
use, and equally correct, with a nice shade of difference in meaning.

All grammarians have found a difficulty in the word _like_, which they
were unable to unravel. They could never account for its use in
expressing a relation between two objectives. They forgot that to be
like, one thing must be _likened_ to another, and that it was the very
meaning of this word to express such like_ness_. John looks _like_ his
brother. The looks, the countenance, or appearance of John, are
_likened_ to his brother's looks or appearance. "This machine is more
like the pattern than any I have seen." Here the adjective _like_ takes
the comparative degree, as it is called, to show a nearer resemblance
than has been before observed between the things compared. "He has a
statesman-_like_ appearance." I _like_ this apple, because it agrees
with my taste; it has qualities _like_ my notion of what is palateable."
In every situation the word is used to express likeness between two
things. It describes one thing by its likeness to another.

Many adjectives are formed from proper nouns by adding an apostrophe and
the letter _s_, except when the word ends in _s_, in which case the
final _s_ is usually omitted for the sake of euphony. This, however, was
not generally adopted by old writers. It is not observed in the earliest
translations of the Bible into the english language. It is now in common
practice. Thus, Montgomery's monument in front of St. Paul's church;
Washington's funeral; Shay's rebelion; England's bitterest foes;
Hamlet's father's ghost; Peter's wife's mother; Todd's, Walker's,
Johnson's dictionary; Winchell's Watts' hymns; Pond's Murray's grammar.
No body would suppose that the "relation of property or possession" was
expressed in these cases, as our grammar books tell us, but that the
terms employed are used to _define_ certain objects, about which we are
speaking. They possess the true character and use of adjectives, and as
such let them be regarded. It must be as false as frivolous to say that
Montgomery, who nobly fell at the siege of Quebec, _owns_ the monument
erected over his remains, which were conveyed to New-York many years
after his death; or that St. Paul _owns_ or _possesses_ the church
beneath which they were deposited; that Hamlet owned his father, and his
father his ghost; that Todd owns Walker, and Walker owns Johnson, and
Johnson his dictionary which may have had a hundred owners, and never
been the property of its author, but printed fifty years after his
death. These words, I repeat, are merely _definitive_ terms, and like
others serve to point out or specify particular objects which may thus
be better known.

Words, however, in common use form adjectives the same as other words;
as, Russia iron, China ships, India silks, Vermont cheese, Orange county
butter, New-York flour, Carolina potatoes. Morocco leather was first
manufactured in a city of Africa called by that name, but it is now made
in almost every town in our country. The same may be said of Leghorn
hats, Russia binding, French shoes, and China ware. Although made in our
own country we still retain the words, morocco, leghorn, russia, french,
and china, to define the fashion, kind, or quality of articles to which
we allude. Much china ware is made in Liverpool, which, to distinguish
it from the real, is called liverpool china. Many french shoes are made
in Lynn, and many Roxbury russets, Newton pippins, and Rhode-Island
greenings, grow in Vermont.

It may not be improper here to notice the adjectives derived from
pronouns, which retain so much of their character as relates to the
persons who employ them. These are _my_, _thy_, _his_, _her_, _its_,
_our_, _your_, _their_, _whose_. This is _my_ book, that is _your_ pen,
this is _his_ knife, and that is _her_ letter. Some of these, like other
words, vary their ending when standing alone; as, two apples are
your_s_, three her_s_, six their_s_, five our_s_, and the rest mine.
_His_ does not alter in popular use. Hence the reason why you hear it so
often, in common conversation, when standing without the noun expressed,
pronounced as if written _hisen_. The word _other_, and some others,
come under the same remark. When the nouns specified are expressed, they
take the regular termination; as, give me these Baldwin apples, and a
few others--a few other apples.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a class of small words which from the frequency of their use
have, like pronouns, lost their primitive character, and are now
preserved only as adjectives. Let us examine a few of them by
endeavoring to ferret out their true meaning and application in the
expression of ideas. We will begin with the old articles, _a_, _an_, and
_the_, by testing the truth and propriety of the duty commonly assigned
to them in our grammars.

The standard grammar asserts that "an article is a word prefixed to
substantives, to point them out, and to show how far their signification
extends; as, "a garden, an eagle, the woman." Skepticism in grammar is
no crime, so we will not hesitate to call in question the correctness of
this "best of all grammars beyond all comparison." Let us consider the
very examples given. They were doubtless the best that could be found.
Does _a_ "point out" the garden, or "show how far its signification
extends?" It does neither of these things. It may name "_any_" garden,
and it certainly does not define whether it is a _great_ or a _small_
one. It simply determines that _one_ garden is the subject of remark.
All else is to be determined by the word _garden_.

We are told there are two articles, the one _in_definite, the other
definite--_a_ is the former, and _the_ the latter. I shall leave it with
you to reconcile the apparent contradiction of an _indefinite_ article
which "is used in a _vague sense, to point out the signification_ of
another word." But I challenge teachers to make their pupils comprehend
such a jargon, if they can do it themselves. But it is as good sense as
we find in many of the popular grammars of the day.

Again, Murray says "_a_ becomes _an_ before a vowel or silent _h_;" and
so say all his _simplifying_ satellites after him. Is such the fact? Is
he right? He is, I most unqualifiedly admit, with this little
correction, the addition of a single word--he is right _wrong_! Instead
of _a_ becoming _an_, the reverse is the fact. The word is derived
directly from the same word which still stands as our first numeral. It
was a short time since written _ane_, as any one may see by consulting
all old books. By and by it dropped the _e_, and afterwards, for the
sake of euphony, in certain cases, the _n_, so that now it stands a
single letter. You all have lived long enough to have noticed the
changes in the word. Formerly we said _an_ union, _an_ holiday, _an_
universalist, _an_ unitarian, &c., expressions which are now rarely
heard. We now say _a_ union, &c. This single instance proves that
arbitrary rules of grammar have little to do in the regulation of
language. Its barriers are of sand, soon removed. It will not be said
that this is an unimportant mistake, for, if an error, it is pernicious,
and if a grammarian knows enough to say that _a_ becomes _an_, he ought
to know that he tells a falsehood, and that _an_ becomes _a_ under
certain circumstances. Mr. Murray gives the following example to
illustrate the use of _a_. "Give me _a_ book; that is, _any_ book." How
can the learner understand such a rule? How will it apply? Let us try
it. "A man has _a_ wife;" that is, _any_ man has _any_ wife. I have a
hat; that is, _any_ hat. A farmer has a farm--_any_ farmer has _any_
farm. A merchant in Boston has a beautiful piece of broadcloth--_any_
merchant in Boston has any beautiful piece of broadcloth. A certain king
of Europe decreed a protestant to be burned--_any_ king of Europe
decreed _any_ protestant to be burned. How ridiculous are the rules we
have learned and taught to others, to enable them to "speak and write
with propriety." No wonder we never understood grammar, if so at
variance with truth and every day's experience. The rules of grammar as
usually taught can never be observed in practice. Hence it is called a
_dry study_. In every thing else we learn something that we can
understand, which will answer some good purpose in the affairs of life.
But this branch of science is among the things which have been tediously
learned to no purpose. No good account can be given of its advantages.

_The_, we are told, "is called the definite article, because it
ascertains what _particular_ thing or things are meant." A most
unfortunate definition, and quite as erroneous as the former. Let us try
it. _The_ stars shine, _the_ lion roars, _the_ camel is a beast of
burden, _the_ deer is good for food, _the_ wind blows, _the_ clouds
appear, _the_ Indians are abused. What is there in these examples, which
"ascertain what _particular_ thing or things are meant?" They are
expressions as _in_definite as we can imagine.

On the other hand, should I say _a_ star shines, _a_ lion roars, _an_
Indian is abused, _a_ wind blows, _a_ cloud appears, you would
understand me to allude very _definitely_ to _one_ "particular" object,
as separate and distinguished from others of its kind.

But what is the wonderful peculiarity in the meaning and use of these
two little words that makes them so unlike every thing else, as to
demand a separate "part of speech?" You may be surprised when I tell you
that there are other words in our language derived from the same source
and possessed of the same meaning; but such is the fact, as will soon
appear. Let us ask for the etymology of these important words. _A_
signifies _one_, never more, never less. In this respect it is always
_definite_. It is sometimes applied to a single thing, sometimes to a
whole class of things, to a [one] man, or to a [one] hundred men. It may
be traced thro other languages, ancient and modern, with little
modification in spelling; Greek _eis_, ein; Latin _unus_; Armoric
_unan_; Spanish and Italian _uno_; Portuguese _hum_; French _un_; German
_ein_; Danish _een_, _en_; Dutch _een_; Swedish _en_; Saxon, _an_,
_aen_, _one_--from which ours is directly derived--old English _ane_;
and more modernly _one_, _an_, _a_. In all languages it defines a thing
to be _one_, a united or congregated whole, and the word _one_ may
always be substituted without affecting the sense. From it is derived
our word _once_, which signifies _oned_, _united_, _joined_, as we shall
see when we come to speak of "contractions." In some languages _a_ is
styled an article, in others it is not. The Latin, for instance, has no
article, and the Greek has no _indefinite_. But all languages have words
which are like ours, pure adjectives, employed to specify certain
things. The argument drawn from the fact that some other languages have
_articles_, and therefore ours should, is fallacious. The Latin, which
was surpassed for beauty of style or power in deliverance by few, if any
others, never suffered from the lack of articles. Nor is there any
reason why we should honor two small adjectives with that high rank to
the exclusion of others quite as worthy.

_The_ is always used as a definitive word, tho it is the least definite
of the defining adjectives. In fact when we desire to "_ascertain
particularly_ what thing is meant," we select some more definite word.
"Give me _the_ books." Which? "Those with red covers, that in calf, and
this in Russia binding." _The_ nations are at peace. What nations?
_Those_ which were at war. You perceive how we employ words which are
more definite, that is, better understood, to "_point out_" the object
of conversation, especially when there is any doubt in the case. What
occasion, then, is there to give these [the?] words a separate "part of
speech," since in character they do not differ from others in the
language?

We will notice another frivolous distinction made by Mr. Murray, merely
to show how learned men may be mistaken, and the folly of trusting to
special rules in the general application of words. He says, "Thou art
_a_ man," is a very general and _harmless_ expression; but, thou art
_the_ man, (as Nathan said to David,) is an assertion capable of
striking terror and remorse into the heart." The distinction in meaning
here, on which he insists, attaches to the articles _a_ and _the_. It is
a sufficient refutation of this definition to make a counter statement.
Suppose we say, "Murray is _the_ best grammarian in the world; or, he is
_a_ fool, _a_ knave, and _a_ liar." Which, think you, would be
considered the most _harmless_ expression? Suppose it had been said to
Aaron Burr, thou art _a_ traitor, or to General William Hull, thou art
_a_ coward, would they regard the phrase as "_harmless!_" On the other
hand, suppose a beautiful, accomplished, and talented young lady, should
observe to one of her suitors, "I have received offers of marriage from
several gentlemen besides yourself, but thou art =the= man of my
choice;" would it, think you, _strike_ terror and remorse into his
heart? I should pity the young student of Murray whose feelings had
become so stoical from the false teaching of his author as to be filled
with "terror and remorse" under such favorable circumstances, while fair
prospects of future happiness were thus rapidly brightening before him.
I speak as to the wise, judge ye what I say.

The adjective _that_ has obtained a very extensive application in
language. However, it may seem to vary in its different positions, it
still retains its primitive meaning. It is comprised of _the_ and _it_,
thait, theat, thaet (Saxon,) thata (Gothic,) dat (Dutch.) It is the most
decided definitive in our language. It is by use applied to things in
the singular, or to a multitude of things regarded as a whole. By use,
it applies to a collection of ideas expressed in a sentence; as, it was
resolved, _that_. What? Then follows _that fact_ which was resolved.
"Provided _that_, in case he does" so and so. "It was agreed _that_,"
_that fact_ was agreed to which is about to be made known. I wish you to
understand, all thro these lectures, _that_ I shall honestly endeavor to
expose error and establish truth. Wish you to understand _what_? _that
fact_, afterwards stated, "I shall endeavor," &c. You can not mistake my
meaning: _that_ would be impossible. What would be impossible? Why, to
mistake my meaning.

You can not fail to observe the true character of this word called by
our grammarians "adjective pronoun," "relative pronoun," and
"conjunction." They did not think to look for its meaning. Had that
(duty) been done, it would have stood forth in its true character, an
important defining word.

The only difficulty in the explanation of this word, originates in the
fact, that it was formerly applied to the plural as well as singular
number. It is now applied to the singular only when referring directly
to an object; as, _that man_. And it never should be used otherwise. But
we often see phrases like this; "These are the men _that_ rebeled." It
should be, "these are the men _who_ rebeled." This difficulty can not be
overcome in existing grammars on any other ground. In modern writings,
such instances are rare. _This_ and _that_ are applied to the singular;
_these_ and _those_ to the plural.

       *       *       *       *       *

=What= is a compound of two original words, and often retains the
meaning of both, when employed as a compound relative, "having in itself
both the antecedent and the relative," as our authors tell us. But when
it is dissected, it will readily enough be understood to be an
adjective, defining things under particular relations.

But I shall weary your patience, I fear, if I stay longer in this place
to examine the etymology of small words. I intended to have shown the
meaning and use of many words included in the list of conjunctions,
which are truly adjectives, such as _both_, _as_, _so_, _neither_,
_and_, etc.; but I let them pass for the present, to be resumed under
the head of contractions.

From the view we have given of this class of words, we are saved the
tediousness of studying the grammatical distinctions made in the books,
where no real distinctions exist. In character these words are like
adjectives; their meaning, like the meaning of all other words, is
peculiar to themselves. Let that be known, and there will be little
difficulty in classing them. We need not confuse the learner with
"adjective pronouns, possessive adjective pronouns, distributive
adjective pronouns, demonstrative adjective pronouns, _indefinite_
adjective pronouns," nor any other adjective pronouns, which can never
be understood nor explained. Children will be slow to apprehend the
propriety of a union of _adjectives_ and _pronouns_, when told that the
former is always used _with_ a noun, and never _for_ one; and the latter
always _for_ a noun, but never _with_ one; and yet, that there is such a
strange combination as a "_distributive or indefinite adjective
pronoun_,"--"confusion worse confounded."

In the french language, the gender of adjectives is varied so as to
agree with the nouns to which they belong. "Possessive pronouns," as
they are called, come under the same rule, which proves them to be in
character, and formation, adjectives; else the person using them must
change gender. The father says, _ma_ (feminine) _fille_, my daughter;
and the mother, _mon_ (masculine) _fils_, my son; the same as they would
say, _bon pere_, good father; _bonne mere_, good mother; or, in Latin,
_bonus pater_, or _bona mater_; or, in Spanish, _bueno padre_, _buena
madre_. In the two last languages, as well as all others, where the
adjectives vary the termination so as to agree with the noun, the same
fact may be observed in reference to their "pronouns." If it is a fact
that these words are _pronouns_, that is, stand for other _nouns_, then
the father is _feminine_, and the mother is _masculine_; and whoever
uses them in reference to the opposite sex must change gender to do so.

       *       *       *       *       *

Describing adjectives admit of variation to express different degrees of
comparison. The regular degrees have been reckoned three; positive,
comparative, and superlative. These are usually marked by changing the
termination. The _positive_ is determined by a comparison with other
things; as, a great house, a small book, compared with others of their
kind. This is truly a comparative degree. The _comparative_ adds _er_;
as, a great_er_ house, a small_er_ book. The _superlative_, _est_; as,
the great_est_ house, the small_est_ book.

Several adjectives express a comparison less than the positive, others
increase or diminish the regular degrees; as, whit_ish_ white, _very_
white, _pure_ white; whit_er_, _considerable_ whiter, _much_ whiter;
whit_est_, the _very_ whitest, _much_ the whitest _beyond all
comparison_, so that there can be none _whiter_, nor _so white_.

We make an aukward use of the words _great_ and _good_, in the
comparison of things; as, a _good deal_, or _great deal_ whiter; a
_good_ many men, or a _great_ many men. As we never hear of a _small_
deal, or a _bad_ deal whiter, nor of a _bad many_, nor _little many_, it
would be well to avoid such phrases.

The words which are added to other adjectives, to increase or diminish
the comparison, or assist in their definition, may properly be called
_secondary adjectives_, for such is their character. They do not refer
to the thing to be _defined_ or _described_, but to the adjective which
is affected, in some way, by them. They are easily distinguished from
the rest by noticing this fact. Take for example: "A _very dark red_ raw
silk lady's dress handkerchief." The resolution of this sentence would
stand thus:

    _A_ (                                               ) handkerchief.
     A  (           ) _red_ (                           ) handkerchief.
     A  (    ) _dark_  red  (                           ) handkerchief.
     A  _very_  dark   red  (                           ) handkerchief.
     A   very   dark   red  (   ) _silk_ (              ) handkerchief.
     A   very   dark   red  _raw_  silk  (              ) handkerchief.
     A   very   dark   red   raw   silk  (      ) _dress_ handkerchief.
     A   very   dark   red   raw   silk  _lady's_  dress  handkerchief.

We might also observe that _hand_ is an adjective, compounded by use
with _kerchief_. It is derived from the french word _couvrir_, to cover,
and _chef_, the head. It means a head dress, a cloth to cover, a neck
cloth, a napkin. By habit we apply it to a single article, and speak of
_neck_ handkerchief.

The nice shade of meaning, and the appropriate use of adjectives, is
more distinctly marked in distinguishing colors than in any thing else,
for the simple reason, that there is nothing in nature so closely
observed. For instance, take the word _green_, derived from _grain_,
because it is grain color, or the color of the fair carpet of nature in
spring and summer. But this hue changes from the _deep grass green_, to
the light olive, and words are chosen to express the thousand varying
tints produced by as many different objects. In the adaptation of
language to the expression of ideas, we do not separate these shades of
color from the things in which such colors are supposed to reside. Hence
we talk of _grass_, _pea_, _olive_, _leek_, _verdigris_, _emerald_,
_sea_, and _bottle_ green; also, of _light_, _dark_, _medium_; _very_
light, or dark grass, pea, olive, or _invisible_ green.

_Red_, as a word, means _rayed_. It describes the appearance or
substance produced when _rayed_, reddened, or radiated by the morning
beams of the sun, or any other _radiating_ cause.

_Wh_ is used for _qu_, in white, which means _quite_, _quited_,
_quitted_, _cleared_, _cleansed_ of all _color_, _spot_, or _stain_.

_Blue_ is another spelling for _blew_. Applied to color, it describes
something in appearance to the sky, when the clouds and mists are
_blown_ away, and the clear _blue ether_ appears.

You will be pleased with the following extract from an eloquent writer
of the last century,[9] who, tho somewhat extravagant in some of his
speculations, was, nevertheless, a close observer of nature, which he
studied as it is, without the aid of human theories. The beauty of the
style, and the correctness of the sentiment, will be a sufficient
apology for its length.

"We shall employ a method, not quite so learned, to convey an idea of
the generation of colors, and the decomposition of the solar ray.
Instead of examining them in a prism of glass, we shall consider them in
the heavens, and there we shall behold the five primordial colours
_unfold themselves_ in the order which we have indicated.

"In a fine summer's night, when the sky is loaded only with some light
vapours, sufficient to stop and to refract the rays of the sun, walk out
into an open plain, where the first fires of Aurora may be perceptible.
You will first observe the horizon _whiten_ at the spot where she is to
make her appearance; and this radiance, from its colour, has procured
for it, in the French language, the name of _aube_, (the dawn,) from the
Latin word _alba_, white. This whiteness insensibly ascends in the
heavens, _assuming_ a tint of yellow some degrees above the horizon; the
yellow as it rises passes into orange; and this shade of orange rises
upward into the lively vermilion, which extends as far as the zenith.
From that point you will perceive in the heavens behind you the violet
succeeding the vermilion, then the azure, after it the deep blue or
indigo colour, and, last of all, the black, quite to the westward.

"Though this display of colours presents a multitude of intermediate
shades, which rapidly succeed each other, yet at the moment the sun is
going to exhibit his disk, the dazzling white is visible in the horizon,
the pure yellow at an elevation of forty-five degrees; the fire color in
the zenith; the pure blue forty-five degrees under it, toward the west;
and in the very west the dark veil of night still lingering on the
horizon. I think I have remarked this progression between the tropics,
where there is scarcely any horizontal refraction to make the light
prematurely encroach on the darkness, as in our climates.

"Sometimes the trade-winds, from the north-east or south-east, blow
there, card the clouds through each other, then sweep them to the west,
crossing and recrossing them over one another, like the osiers
interwoven in a transparent basket. They throw over the sides of this
chequered work the clouds which are not employed in the contexture, roll
them up into enormous masses, as white as snow, draw them out along
their extremities in the form of a crupper, and pile them upon each
other, moulding them into the shape of mountains, caverns, and rocks;
afterwards, as evening approaches, they grow somewhat calm, as if afraid
of deranging their own workmanship. When the sun sets behind this
magnificent netting, a multitude of luminous rays are transmitted
through the interstices, which produce such an effect, that the two
sides of the lozenge illuminated by them have the appearance of being
girt with gold, and the other two in the shade seem tinged with _ruddy_
orange. Four or five divergent streams of light, emanated from the
setting sun up to the zenith, _clothe_ with fringes of gold the
undeterminate summits of this celestial barrier, and strike with the
reflexes of their fires the pyramids of the collateral aerial mountains,
which then appear to consist of _silver_ and _vermilion_. At this moment
of the evening are perceptible, amidst their redoubled ridges, a
multitude of valleys extending into infinity, and distinguishing
themselves at their opening by some shade of flesh or of rose colour.

"These celestial valleys present in their different contours inimitable
tints of white, melting away into white, or shades lengthening
themselves out without mixing over other shades. You see, here and
there, issuing from the cavernous sides of those mountains, tides of
_light_ precipitating themselves, in ingots of gold and silver, over
rocks of coral. Here it is a gloomy rock, pierced through and through,
disclosing, beyond the aperture, the pure azure of the firmament; there
it is an extensive strand, covered with sands of gold, stretching over
the rich ground of heaven; _poppy-coloured_, _scarlet_, and _green_ as
the emerald.

"The reverberation of those western colours diffuses itself over the
sea, whose azure billows it _glazes_ with saffron and purple. The
mariners, leaning over the gunwale of the ship, admire in silence those
aerial landscapes. Sometimes this sublime spectacle presents itself to
them at the hour of prayer, and seems to invite them to lift up their
hearts with their voices to the heavens. It changes every instant into
forms as variable as the shades, presenting celestial colors and forms
which no pencil can pretend to imitate, and no language can describe.

"Travellers who have, at various seasons, ascended to the summits of the
highest mountains on the globe, never could perceive, in the clouds
below them, any thing but a gray and lead-colored surface, similar to
that of a lake. The sun, notwithstanding, illuminated them with his
whole light; and his rays might there combine all the laws of refraction
to which our systems of physics have subjected them. Hence not a single
shade of color is employed in vain, through the universe; those
celestial decorations being made for the level of the earth, their
magnificent point of view taken from the habitation of man.

"These admirable concerts of lights and forms, manifest only in the
lower region of the clouds the least illuminated by the sun, are
produced by laws with which I am totally unacquainted. But the whole are
reducible to five colors: yellow, a generation from white; red, a deeper
shade of yellow; blue, a strong tint of red; and black, the extreme tint
of blue. This progression cannot be doubted, on observing in the morning
the expansion of the light in the heavens. You there see those five
colors, with their intermediate shades, generating each other nearly in
this order: white, sulphur yellow, lemon yellow, yolk of egg yellow,
orange, aurora color, poppy red, full red, carmine red, purple, violet,
azure, indigo, and black. Each color seems to be only a strong tint of
that which precedes it, and a faint tint of that which follows; thus the
whole together appear to be only modulations of a progression, of which
white is the first term, and black the last.

"Indeed trade cannot be carried on to any advantage, with the Negroes,
Tartars, Americans, and East-Indians, but through the medium of red
cloths. The testimonies of travellers are unanimous respecting the
preference universally given to this color. I have indicated the
universality of this taste, merely to demonstrate the falsehood of the
philosophic axiom, that tastes are arbitrary, or that there are in
Nature no laws for beauty, and that our tastes are the effects of
prejudice. The direct contrary of this is the truth; prejudice corrupts
our natural tastes, otherwise the same over the whole earth.

"With red Nature heightens the brilliant parts of the most beautiful
flowers. She has given a complete clothing of it to the rose, the queen
of the garden: and bestowed this tint on the blood, the principle of
life in animals: she invests most of the feathered race, in India, with
a plumage of this color, especially in the season of love; and there are
few birds without some shades, at least, of this rich hue. Some preserve
entirely the gray or brown ground of their plumage, but glazed over with
red, as if they had been rolled in carmine; others are besprinkled with
red, as if you had blown a scarlet powder over them.

"The red (or _rayed_) color, in the midst of the five primordial colors,
is the harmonic expression of them by way of excellence; and the result
of the union of two contraries, light and darkness. There are, besides,
agreeable tints, compounded of the oppositions of extremes. For example,
of the second and fourth color, that is, of yellow and blue, is formed
green, which constitutes a very beautiful harmony, and ought, perhaps,
to possess the second rank in beauty, among colors, as it possesses the
second in their generation. Nay, green appears to many, if not the most
beautiful tint, at least the most lovely, because it is less dazzling
than red, and more congenial to the eye."

Many words come under the example previously given to illustrate the
secondary character of adjectives, which should be carefully noticed by
the learner, to distinguish whether they define or describe things, or
are added to increase the distinction made by the adjectives themselves,
for both defining and describing adjectives admit of this addition; as,
_old_ English coin, New England rebelion; a mounted whip, and a _gold_
mounted sword--not a gold sword; a _very fine_ Latin scholar.

Secondary adjectives, also, admit of comparison in various ways; as,
_dearly_ beloved, a _more_ beloved, the _best_ beloved, the _very_ best
beloved brother.

Words formerly called "prepositions," admit of comparison, as I have
before observed. "Benhadad fled into an _inner_ chamber." The in_ner_
temple. The in_most_ recesses of the heart. The _out_ fit of a squadron.
The out_er_ coating of a vessel, or house. The ut_most_ reach of
grammar. The _up_ and _down_ hill side of a field. The up_per_ end of
the lot. The upper_most_ seats. A part _of_ the book. Take it _farther
off_. The _off_ cast. India _beyond_ the Ganges. Far beyond the
boundaries of the nation. I shall go _to_ the city. I am _near to_ the
town. _Near_ does not _qualify the verb_, for it has nothing to do with
it. I can exist in one place as well as another. It is _below_ the
surface; _very far_ below it. It is above the earth--"high above all
height."

Such expressions frequently occur in the expression of ideas, and are
correctly understood; as difficult as it may have been to describe them
with the theories learned in the books--sometimes calling them one
thing, sometimes another--when their character and meaning was
unchanged, or, according to old systems, had "no meaning at all of their
own!"

But I fear I have gone _far_ beyond your patience, and, perhaps, entered
_deeper_ into this subject than was necessary, to enable you to discover
my meaning. I desired to make the subject _as_ distinct _as_ possible,
that all might see the important improvement suggested. I am
apprehensive even now, that some will be compelled to _think_ many
_profound thoughts_ before they will see the end of the obscurity under
which they have long been shrouded, in reference to the false rules
which they have been taught. But we have one consolation--those who are
not bewildered by the grammars they have tried in vain to understand,
will not be very likely to make a wrong use of adjectives, especially if
they have ideas to express; for there is no more danger of mistaking an
adjective for a noun, or verb, than there is of mistaking a _horse_
chestnut for a _chestnut_ horse.

       *       *       *       *       *

In our next we shall commence the consideration of Verbs, the most
important department in the science of language, and particularly so in
the system we are defending. I hope you have not been uninterested thus
far in the prosecution of the subject of language, and I am confident
you will not be in what remains to be said upon it. The science, so long
regarded _dry_ and uninteresting, becomes delightful and easy; new and
valuable truths burst upon us at each advancing step, and we feel to
bless God for the ample means afforded us for obtaining knowledge from,
and communicating it to others, on the most important affairs of time
and eternity.




LECTURE VIII.

ON VERBS.

    Unpleasant to expose error.--Verbs defined.--Every thing acts.--
    Actor and object.--Laws.--Man.--Animals.--Vegetables.--Minerals.--
    Neutrality degrading.--Nobody can explain a neuter verb.--_One_ kind
    of verbs.--_You_ must decide.--Importance of teaching children the
    truth.--Active verbs.--Transitive verbs false.--Samples.--Neuter
    verbs examined.--Sit.--Sleep.--Stand.--Lie.--Opinion of Mrs.
    W.--Anecdote.


We now come to the consideration of that class of words which in the
formation of language are called _Verbs_. You will allow me to bespeak
your favorable attention, and to insist most strenuously on the
propriety of a free and thoro examination into the nature and use of
these words. I shall be under the necessity of performing the thankless
task of exposing the errors of honest, wise, and good men, in order to
remove difficulties which have long existed in works on language, and
clear the way for a more easy and consistent explanation of this
interesting and essential department of literature. I regret the
necessity for such labors; but no person who wishes the improvement of
mankind, or is willing to aid the growth of the human intellect, in its
high aspirations after truth, knowledge, and goodness, should shrink
from a frank exposition of what he deems to be error, nor refuse his
assistance, feeble tho it may be, in the establishment of correct
principles.

In former lectures we have confined our remarks to things and a
description of their characters and relations, so that every entity of
which we can conceive a thought, or concerning which we can form an
expression, has been defined and described in the use of nouns and
adjectives. Every thing in creation, of which we think, material or
immaterial, real or imaginary, and to which we give a name, to represent
the idea of it, comes under the class of words called nouns. The words
which specify or distinguish one thing from another, or describe its
properties, character, or relations, are designated as adjectives. There
is only one other employment left for words, and that is the expression
of the actions, changes, or inherent tendencies of things. This
important department of knowledge is, in grammar, classed under the head
of =Verbs=.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Verb_ is derived from the Latin _verbum_, which signifies a _word_. By
specific application it is applied to those _words_ only which express
action, correctly understood; the same as Bible, derived from the Greek
"_biblos_" means literally _the book_, but, by way of eminence, is
applied to the sacred scriptures only.

This interesting class of words does not deviate from the correct
principles which we have hitherto observed in these lectures. It depends
on established laws, exerted in the regulation of matter and thought;
and whoever would learn its sublime use must be a close observer of
things, and the mode of their existence. The important character it
sustains in the production of ideas of the changes and tendencies of
things and in the transmission of thought, will be found simple, and
obvious to all.

Things exist; Nouns name them.

Things differ; Adjectives define or describe them.

Things act; Verbs express their actions.

    _All Verbs denote action._

By action, we mean not only perceivable motion, but an inherent tendency
to change, or resist action. It matters not whether we speak of animals
possessed of the power of locomotion; of vegetables, which _send_ forth
their branches, leaves, blossoms, and fruits; or of minerals, which
_retain_ their forms, positions, and properties. The same principles are
concerned, the same laws exist, and should be observed in all our
attempts to understand their operations, or employ them in the promotion
of human good. Every thing acts according to the ability it possesses;
from the small particle of sand, which _occupies_ its place upon the sea
shore, up thro the various gradation of being, to the tall archangel,
who _bows_ and _worships_ before the throne of the uncreated Cause of
all things and actions which exist thro out his vast dominions.

As all actions presuppose an _actor_, so every action must result on
some _object_. No effect can exist without an efficient cause to produce
it; and no cause can exist without a corresponding effect resulting from
it. These mutual relations, helps, and dependencies, are manifest in all
creation. Philosophy, religion, the arts, and all science, serve only to
develope these primary laws of nature, which unite and strengthen,
combine and regulate, preserve and guide the whole. From the Eternal I
AM, the uncreated, self-existent, self-sustaining =Cause= of all things,
down to the minutest particle of dust, evidences may be traced of the
existence and influence of these laws, in themselves irresistible,
exceptionless, and immutable. Every thing has a place and a duty
assigned it; and harmony, peace, and perfection are the results of a
careful and judicious observance of the laws given for its regulation.
Any infringement of these laws will produce disorder, confusion, and
distraction.

Man is made a little lower than the angels, possessed of a mind capable
of reason, improvement, and happiness; an intellectual soul inhabiting a
mortal body, the connecting link between earth and heaven--the material
and spiritual world. As a physical being, he is subject, in common with
other things, to the laws which regulate matter: as an intellectual
being, he is governed by the laws which regulate mind: as possessed of
both a body and mind, a code of moral laws demand his observance in all
the social relations and duties of life. Obedience to these laws is the
certain source of health of body, and peace of mind. An infringement of
them will as certainly be attended with disease and suffering to the
one, and sorrow and anguish to the other.

Lower grades of animals partake of many qualities in common with man. In
some they are deficient; in others they are superior. Some animals are
possessed of all but reason, and even in that, the highest of them come
very little short of the lowest of the human species. If they have not
reason, they possess an instinct which nearly approaches it. These
qualities dwindle down gradually thro the various orders and varieties
of animated nature, to the lowest grade of animalculæ, a multitude of
which may inhabit a single drop of water; or to the zoophytes and
lythophytes, which form the connecting link between the animal and
vegetable kingdom; as the star-fish, the polypus, and spunges. Then
strike off into another kingdom, and observe the laws vegetable life.
Mark the tall pine which has grown from a small seed which _sent_ forth
its root downwards and its trunk upwards, drawing nourishment from
earth, air, and water, till it now waves its top to the passing breeze,
a hundred feet above this dirty earth: or the oak or olive, which have
_maintained_ their respective positions a dozen centuries despite the
operations of wind and weather, and have shed their foliage and their
seeds to propagate their species and extend their kinds to different
places. While a hundred generations have lived and died, and the country
often changed masters, they resist oppression, scorn misrule, and retain
rights and privileges which are slowly encroached upon by the inroads of
time, which will one day triumph over them, and they fall helpless to
the earth, to submit to the chemical operations which shall dissolve
their very being and cause them to mingle with the common dust, yielding
their strength to give life and power to other vegetables which shall
occupy their places.[10] Or mark the living principle in the "sensitive
plant," which withers at every touch, and suffers long ere it regains
its former vigor.

Descend from thence, down thro the various gradations of vegetable life,
till you pass the narrow border and enter the mineral world. Here you
will see displayed the same sublime principle, tho in a modified degree.
Minerals _assume_ different shapes, hues and relations; they increase
and diminish, attach and divide under various circumstances, all the
while _retaining_ their identity and properties, and exerting their
abilities according to the means they possess, till compelled to yield
to a superior power, and learn to submit to the laws which operate in
every department of this mutable world.

_Every_ thing _acts_ according to the ability God has bestowed upon it;
and man can do no more. He has authority over all things on earth, and
yet he is made to depend upon all. His authority extends no farther than
a privilege, under wholesome restrictions, of making the whole
subservient to his real good. When he goes beyond this, he usurps a
power which belongs not to him, and the destruction of his happiness
pays the forfeit of his imprudence. The injured power rises triumphant
over the aggressor, and the glory of God's government, in the righteous
and immediate execution of his laws, is clearly revealed. So long as man
obeys the laws which regulate health, observes temperance in all things,
uses the things of this world as not abusing them, he is at rest, he is
blessed, he is happy: but no sooner has he violated heaven's law than he
becomes the slave, and the servant assumes the master. But I am
digressing. I would gladly follow this subject further, but I shall go
beyond my limits, and, it may be, your patience.

I would insist, however, on the facts to which your attention has been
given, for it is impossible, as I have before contended, to use language
correctly without a knowledge of the things and ideas it is employed to
represent.

Grovelling, indeed, must be the mind which will not trace the sublime
exhibitions of Divine power and skill in all the operations of nature;
and false must be that theory which teaches the young mind to think and
speak of neutrality as attached to things which do exist. As low and
debasing as the speculations of the schoolmen were, they gave to things
which they conceived to be incapable of action, a principle which they
called "_vis inertiæ_," or, _power to lie still_. Shall our systems of
instruction descend below them, throw an insurmountable barrier in the
way of human improvement, and teach the false principles that actions
can exist without an effect, or that there is a class of words which
"express neither action or passion." Such a theory is at war with the
first principles of philosophy, and denies that "like causes produce
like effects."

The ablest minds have never been able to explain the foundation of a
"neuter verb," or to find a single word, with a solitary exception,
which does not, in certain conditions, express a positive action, and
terminate on a definite object; and that exception we shall see refers
to a verb which expresses the highest degree of conceivable action.
Still they have insisted on _three_ and some on _four_ kinds of verbs,
one expressing action, another passion or suffering, and the third
neutrality. We propose to offer a brief review of these distinctions,
which have so long perplexed, not only learners, but teachers
themselves, and been the fruitful source of much dissention among
grammarians.

It is to be hoped you will come up to this work with as great candor as
you have heretofore manifested, and as fully resolved to take nothing
for granted, because it has been said by good or great men, and to
reject nothing because it appears new or singular. Let truth be our
object and reason our guide to direct us to it. We can not fail of
arriving at safe and correct conclusions.

Mr. Murray tells us that "verbs are of three kinds, _active_, _passive_,
and _neuter_. In a note he admits of "active _transitive_ and
intransitive verbs," as a subdivision of his first kind. Most of his
"improvers" have adopted this distinction, and regard it as of essential
importance.

We shall contend, as before expressed, that _all_ verbs are of _one
kind_, that they _express action_, for the simple yet sublime reason,
that every thing acts, at all times, and under every possible condition;
according to the true definition of _action_ as understood and employed
by all writers on grammar, and natural and moral science. Here we are at
issue. Both, contending for principles so opposite, can not be correct.
One or the other, however pure the motives, must be attached to a system
wrong in theory, and of course pernicious in practice. You are to be the
umpires in the case, and, if you are faithful to your trust, you will
not be bribed or influenced in the least by the opinions of others. If
divested of all former attachments, if free from all prejudice, there
can be no doubt of the safety and correctness of your conclusions. But I
am apprehensive I expect too much, if I place the _new_ system of
grammar on a footing equally favorable in your minds with those you have
been taught to respect, as the only true expositions of language, from
your childhood up, and which are recommended to you on the authority of
the learned and good of many generations. I have to combat early
prejudices, and systems long considered as almost sacred. But I have in
my favor the common sense of the world, and a feeling of opposition to
existing systems, which has been produced, not so much by a detection of
their errors, as by a lack of capacity, as the learner verily thought,
to understand their profound mysteries. I am, therefore, willing to risk
the final decision with you, if _you_ will decide. But I am not willing
to have you made the tools of the opposite party, determined, whether
convinced or not, to hold to your old _neuter_ verb systems, right or
wrong, merely because others are doing so. All I ask is _your_ adoption
of what is proved to be undeniably true, and rejection of whatever is
found to be false.

Here is where the matter must rest, for it will not be pretended that it
is better to teach falsehood because it is ancient and popular, than
truth because it is novel. Teachers, in this respect, stand in a most
responsible relation to their pupils. They should always insist with an
unyielding pertinacity, on the importance of truth, and the evils of
error. Every trifling incident, in the course of education, which will
serve to show the contrast, should be particularly observed. If an error
can be detected in their books, they should be so taught as to be able
to correct it; and they should be so inclined as to be willing to do it.
They should not be skeptics, however, but close observers, original
thinkers, and correct reasoners. It is degrading to the true dignity and
independence of man, to submit blindly to any proposition. Freedom of
thought is the province of all. Children should be made to breathe the
free air of honest inquiry, and to inhale the sweet spirit of truth and
charity. They should not study their books as the end of learning, but
as a means of knowing. Books should be regarded as lamps, which are set
by the way side, not as the objects to be looked at, but the aids by
which we may find the object of our search. Knowledge and usefulness
constitute the leading motives in all study, and no occasion should be
lost, no means neglected, which will lead the young mind to their
possession.

Your attention is now invited to some critical remarks on the
distinctions usually observed in the use of verbs. Let us carefully
examine the meaning of these _three kinds_ and see if there is any
occasion for such a division; if they have any foundation in truth, or
application in the correct use of language. We will follow the
arrangements adopted by the most popular grammars.

"A _verb active_ expresses an action, and necessarily implies an agent,
and an object acted upon; as, to love, I love Penelope." A very
excellent definition, indeed! Had grammarians stopped here, their works
would have been understood, and proved of some service in the study of
language. But when they diverge from this bright spot in the
consideration of verbs--this oasis in the midst of a desert--they soon
become lost in the surrounding darkness of conjecture, and follow each
their own dim light, to hit on a random track, which to follow in the
pursuit of their object.

We give our most hearty assent to the above definition of a verb. It
expresses action, which necessarily implies an _actor_, and an _object_
influenced by the action. In our estimation it matters not whether the
object on which the action terminates is expressed or _understood_. If I
_love_, I must love some object; either my neighbor, my enemy, my
family, _myself_, or something else. In either case the _action_ is the
same, tho the objects may be different; and it is regarded, on all
hands, as an active verb. Hence when the object on which the action
terminates is not expressed, it is necessarily understood. All language
is, in this respect, more or less eliptical, which adds much to its
richness and brevity.

Active verbs, we are told, are divided into _transitive_ and
_intransitive_. Mr. Murray does not exactly approve of this distinction,
but prefers to class the intransitive and neuter together. Others, aware
of the fallacy of attempting to make children conceive any thing like
neutrality in the verbs, _run_, _fly_, _walk_, _live_, &c., have
preferred to mark the distinction and call them _in_transitive; because,
say they, they do not terminate on any object expressed.

A _transitive verb_ "expresses an action which passes from the agent to
the object; as, Cæsar conquered Pompey." To this definition we can not
consent. It attempts a distinction where there is none. It is not true
in principle, and can not be adopted in practice.

"Cæsar conquered Pompey." Did the act of conquering pass _transitively_
over from _Cæsar_ to Pompey? They might not have seen each other during
the whole battle, nor been within many miles of each other. They, each
of them, stood at the head of their armies, and alike gave orders to
their subordinate officers, and they again to their inferiors, and so
down, each man contending valiantly for _victory_, till, at last, the
fate of the day sealed the downfall of Pompey, and placed the crown of
triumph on the head of Cæsar. The expression is a correct one, but the
action expressed by the verb "conquered," is not transitive, as that
term is understood. A whole train of causes was put in operation which
finally terminated in the defeat of one, and the conquest of the other.

"Bonaparte _lost_ the battle of Waterloo." What did _he_ do to _lose_
the battle? He exerted his utmost skill to _gain_ the battle and escape
defeat. He did not do a single act, he entertained not a single thought,
which lead to such a result; but strove against it with all his power.
If the fault was _his_, it was because he failed to act, and not because
he labored to _lose_ the battle. He had too much at stake to adopt such
a course, and no man but a teacher of grammar, would ever accuse him of
_acting_ to _lose_ the battle.

"A man was sick; he desired to recover (his health). He took, for
medicine, opium by mistake, and _lost_ his life by it." Was he guilty of
suicide? Certainly, if our grammars are true. But he _lost_ his life in
trying to get well.

"A man in America _possesses_ property in Europe, and his children
_inherit_ it after his death." What do the children do to _inherit_ this
property, of which they know nothing?

"The geese, by their gabbling, _saved_ Rome from destruction." How did
the geese save the city? They made a noise, which waked the sentinels,
who roused the soldiers to arms; they fought, slew many Gauls, and
delivered the city.

"A man in New-York _transacts_ business in Canton." How does he do it?
He has an agent there to whom he sends his orders, and he transacts the
business. But how does he get his letters? The clerk writes them, the
postman carries them on board the ship, the captain commands the
sailors, who work the ropes which unfurl the sails, the wind blows, the
vessel is managed by the pilot, and after a weary voyage of several
months, the letters are delivered to the agent, who does the business
that is required of him.

The miser _denies_ himself every comfort, and spends his whole life in
hoarding up riches; and yet he dies and _leaves_ his gold to be the
possession of others.

Christians _suffer_ insults almost every day from the Turks.

Windows _admit_ light and _exclude_ cold.

Who can discover any thing like _transitive_ action--a passing from the
agent to the object--in these cases? What transitive action do the
windows perform to _admit the light_; or the christians, to _suffer
insults_; or the miser, to _leave his money_? If there is neutrality any
where, we would look for it here. The fact is, these words express
_relative_ action, as we shall explain when we come to the examination
of the true character of the verb.

_Neutrality_ signifies (transitive verb!) no action, and _neuter_ verbs
_express a state of being_! A class of words which can not act, which
apply to things in a quiescent state, _perform_ the transitive action of
"_expressing_ a state of being!"

Who does not perceive the inconsistency and folly of such distinctions?
And who has not found himself perplexed, if not completely bewildered in
the dark and intricate labyrinths into which he has been led by the
false grammar books! Every attempt he has made to extricate himself, by
the dim light of the "simplifiers," has only tended to bewilder him
still more, till he is utterly confounded, or else abandons the study
altogether.

       *       *       *       *       *

An _intransitive_ verb "denotes action which is confined to the actor,
and does not pass over to another object; as, I sit, he lives, they
sleep."

"A verb _neuter_ expresses neither action nor passion, but being, or a
state of being; as, I am, I sleep, I sit."

These verbs are nearly allied in character; but we will examine them
separately and fairly. The examples are the same, with exception of the
verb _to be_, which we will notice by itself, and somewhat at large, in
another place.

Our first object will be to ascertain the _meaning_ and use of the words
which have been given as samples of neutrality. It is unfortunate for
the neuter systems that they can not define a "neuter verb" without
making it express an action which terminates on some object.

       *       *       *

"The man _sits_ in his chair."

_Sits_, we are told, is a neuter verb. What does it mean? The man
_places_ himself in a sitting posture in his _seat_. He _keeps_ himself
in his chair by muscular energy, assisted by gravitation. The chair
_upholds_ him in that condition. Bring a small child and _sit_ it
(active verb,) in a chair beside him. Can it _sit_? No; it falls upon
the floor and is injured. Why did it fall? It was not able to _keep_
itself from falling. The lady fainted and _fell_ from her _seat_. If
there is no action in sitting, why did she not remain as she was? A
company of ladies and gentlemen from the boarding school and college,
entered the parlor of a teacher of neuter verbs; and he asked them to
_sit_ down, or be _seated_. They were neutral. He called them impolite.
But they replied, that _sit_ "expresses neither action nor passion," and
hence he could not expect them to occupy his seats.

"_Sit_ or _set_ it away; _sit_ near me; _sit_ farther along; _sit_
still;" are expressions used by every teacher in addressing his
scholars. On the system we are examining, what would they understand by
such inactive expressions? Would he not correct them for disobeying his
orders? But what did he order them to do? Nothing at all, if _sit_
denotes no action.

    "I _sat_ me down and wept."

    "He _sat him_ down by a pillar's base,
    And drew his hand athwart his face."
                              _Byron._

    "Then, having shown his wounds, he'd _sit him_ down,
    And, all the live long day, discourse of war."
                              _Tragedy of Douglass._

            "But wherefore _sits he_ there?
    Death on my state! _This act_ convinces me
    That this retiredness of the duke and her,
    Is plain contempt."
                              _King Lear._

    "_Sitting_, the _act of resting_ on a seat.
    _Session_, the _act of sitting_."
                              _Johnson's Dictionary._

       *       *       *

"_I sleep._"

Is sleep a neuter verb? So we are gravely told by our authors. Can
grammarians follow their own rules? If so, they may spend the "live long
night" and "its waking hours," without resorting to "tired nature's
sweet restorer, balmy sleep;" for there is no process under heaven
whereby they can procure sleep, unless they _sleep_ it. For one, I can
never _sleep_ without sleeping _sleep_--sometimes only a short _nap_. It
matters not whether the object is expressed or not. The action remains
the same. The true object is necessarily understood, and it would be
superfluous to name it. Cases, however, often occur where, both in
speaking and writing, it becomes indispensable to mention the object.
"The stout hearted have _slept_ their sleep." "They shall _sleep_ the
_sleep_ of death." "They shall _sleep_ the perpetual _sleep_, and shall
not awake." "_Sleep_ on now and _take_ your rest." The child was
troublesome and the mother sung it to sleep, and it _slept itself_
quiet. A lady took opium and _slept herself_ to death. "Many persons
sleep themselves into a kind of unnatural stupidity." Rip Van Winkle,
according to the legend, _slept_ away a large portion of a common life.

    "Sleep, sleep to-day, tormenting cares."

    "And _sleep_ dull _cares_ away."

Was your sleep refreshing last night? How did you procure it? Let a
person who still adheres to his _neuter_ verbs, that sleep expresses no
action, and has no object on which it terminates, put his theory in
practice; he may as well sleep with his eyes open, sitting up, as to
_lie himself_ upon his bed.

A man lodged in an open chamber, and while he was _sleeping_ (doing
nothing) he _caught_ a severe _cold_ (active transitive verb) and had a
long _run_ of the fever. Who does not see, not only the bad, but also
the false philosophy of such attempted distinctions? How can you make a
child discover any difference in the _act of sleeping_, whether there is
an object after it, or not? Is it not the same? And is not the object
necessarily implied, whether expressed or not? Can a person _sleep_,
without procuring _sleep_?

       *       *       *

"_I stand._"

The man _stands_ firm in his integrity. Another stands in a very
precarious condition, and being unable to retain his hold, _falls_ down
the precipice and is killed. Who is killed? The man, surely. Why did he
fall? Because he could not _stand_. But there is no _action_ in
_standing_, say the books.

"_Stand_ by thyself, come not near me?" "_Stand_ fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ hath made you free, and _be_ not again entangled in the
yoke of bondage." "Let him that thinketh he _standeth_, take heed lest
he _fall_." If it requires no act to _stand_, there can be no danger of
falling.

"Two pillars stood together; the rest had fallen to the ground. The one
on the right was quite perfect in all its parts. The other _resembled
it_ very much, except it had _lost_ its capital, and _suffered_ some
other injuries." How could the latter column, while performing no action
in _standing_, act _transitively_, according to our grammars, and do
something to _resemble_ the other? or, what did it do to _lose_ its
capital, and _suffer_ other injury?

       *       *       *

"To _lie_, or _lay_."

It has been admitted that the verbs before considered are often used as
active verbs, and that there is, in truth, action expressed by them.
But when the man has fallen from his seat and _lies_ upon the floor, it
is contended that he no longer acts, and that _lie_ expresses no action.
He has ceased from physical, muscular action regulated by his will, and
is now subject to the common laws which govern matter.

Let us take a strong example. The book _lies_ or _lays_ on the desk. Now
you ask, does that book perform any action in laying on the desk? I
answer, yes; and I will prove it on the principles of the soundest
philosophy, to the satisfaction of every one present. Nor will I deviate
from existing grammars to do it, so far as real action is concerned.

The book _lies_ on the desk. The desk _supports_ the book. Will you
parse _supports_? It is, according to every system, an active transitive
verb. It has an objective case after it on which the action terminates.
But what does the desk do to _support_ the book? It barely resists the
action which the book _performs_ in lying on it. The action of the desk
and book is reciprocal. But if the book does not act, neither can the
desk act, for that only repels the force of the book in pressing upon it
in its tendency towards the earth, in obedience to the law of
gravitation. And yet our authors have told us that the desk is _active_
in resisting no action of the book! No wonder people are unable to
understand grammar. It violates the first principles of natural science,
and frames to itself a code of laws, unequal, false, and exceptionable,
which bear no affinity to the rest of the world, and will not apply in
the expression of ideas.

I was once lecturing on this subject in one of the cities of New-York.
Mrs. W., the distinguished teacher of one of the most popular Female
Seminaries in our country, attended. At the close of one lecture she
remarked that the greatest fault she had discovered in the new system,
was the want of a class of words to express neutrality. Children, she
said, conceived ideas of things in a quiescent state, and words should
be taught them by which to communicate such ideas. I asked her for an
example. She gave the rock in the side of the mountain. It had never
moved. It could never act. There it had been from the foundation of the
earth, and there it would remain unaltered and unchanged till time
should be no longer. I remarked, that I would take another small stone
and _lay_ it on the great one which could never act, and now we say the
great rock _upholds_, _sustains_ or _supports_ the small one--all active
transitive verbs with an object expressed.

She replied, she would give it up, for it had satisfied her of a new
principle which must be observed in the exposition of all language,
which accords with _facts as developed in physical and mental science_.

I continued, not only does that rock act in resisting the force of the
small one which lays upon it, but, by the attraction of gravitation it
is able to _maintain_ its _position_ in the side of the mountain; by
cohesion it _retains_ its distinct identity and solidity, and repels all
foreign bodies. It is also subject to the laws which govern the earth in
its diurnal and annual revolutions, and moves in common with other
matter at the astonishing rate of a thousand miles in an hour! Who shall
teach children, in these days of light and improvement, the grovelling
doctrine of neutrality, this relic of the peripatetic philosophy? Will
parents send their children to school to learn falsehood? And can
teachers be satisfied to remain in ignorance, following with blind
reverence the books they have studied, and refuse to examine new
principles, fearing they shall be compelled to acknowledge former
errors and study new principles? They should remember it is wiser and
more honorable to confess a fault and correct it, than it is to remain
permanent in error.

Let us take another example of the verb "_to lie_." A country pedagogue
who has followed his authorities most devotedly, and taught his pupils
that _lie_ is a "_neuter verb_, expressing neither action nor passion,
but simply being, or a state of being," goes out, during the
intermission, into a grove near by, to _exercise himself_. In attempting
to roll a log up the hill, he _makes_ a mis-step, and _falls_
(intransitive verb, _nothing_ falls!) to the ground, and the log _rolls_
(_nothing_) on to him, and _lies_ across his legs. In this condition he
is observed by his scholars to whom he cries (nothing) for help. "Do
(nothing) come (intransitive) and help me." They obey him and remain
_neuter_, or at least act _intransitively_, and produce no effects. He
cries again for help and his _cries_ are regarded. They _present_
themselves before him. "Do roll this log off; it will break my legs."
"Oh no, master; how can that be? The log _lies_ on you, does it not?"
"Yes, and it will _press me_ to death." "No, no; that can never be. The
log can not act. =Lies= is a _neuter_ verb, signifying neither _action_
nor passion, but simply being or a state of being. You have a _state_ of
being, and the log has a state of being. It can not harm you. You must
have forgotten the practical application of the truths you have been
teaching us." It would be difficult to explain neuter verbs in such a
predicament.

    "Now I _lay_ me down _to sleep_."

"She died and they _laid her_ beside her lover under the spreading
branches of the willow."

"They _laid it_ away so secure that they could never find it."

They _laid_ down to _rest themselves_ after the fatigue of a whole day's
journey.

We have now considered the model verbs of the neuter kind, with the
exception of the verb =to be=, which is left for a distinct
consideration, being the most active of all verbs. It is unnecessary to
spend much time on this point. The errors I have examined have all been
discovered by teachers of language, long ago, but few have ventured to
correct them. An alleviation of the difficulty has been sought in the
adoption of the intransitive verb, which "expresses an action that is
confined to the actor or agent."

The remarks which have been given in the present lecture will serve as a
hint to the course we shall adopt in treating of them, but the more
particular examination of their character and uses, together with some
general observation on the agents and objects of verbs, will be deferred
to our next lecture.




LECTURE IX.

ON VERBS.

    Neuter and intransitive.--Agents.--Objects.--No actions as such can
    be known distinct from the agent.--Imaginary actions.--Actions known
    by their effects.--Examples.--Signs should guide to things
    signified.--Principles of action.--=Power=.--Animals.--Vegetables.
    --Minerals.--All things act.--Magnetic needle.--=Cause=.--Explained.
    --First Cause.--=Means=.--Illustrated.--Sir I. Newton's example.--
    These principles must be known.--=Relative= action.--Anecdote of
    Gallileo.


We resume the consideration of verbs. We closed our last lecture with
the examination of _neuter verbs_, as they have been called. It appears
to us that evidence strong enough to convince the most skeptical was
adduced to prove that _sit_, _sleep_, _stand_ and _lie_, stand in the
same relation to language as other verbs, that they do not, in any case,
express neutrality, but frequently admit an objective word after them.
These are regarded as the most neutral of all the verbs except _to be_,
which, by the way, expresses the highest degree of action, as we shall
see when we come to inquire into its meaning.

Grammarians have long ago discovered the falsity of the books in the use
of a large portion of verbs which have been called neuter. To obviate
the difficulty, some of them have adopted the distinction of
_Intransitive_ verbs, which express action, but terminate on no object;
others still use the term _neuter_, but teach their scholars that when
the _object_ is _expressed_, it is active. This distinction has only
tended to perplex learners, while it afforded only a temporary expedient
to teachers, by which to dodge the question at issue. So far as the
action is concerned, which it is the business of the verb to express,
what is the difference whether "I _run_, or _run_ myself?" "A man
started in haste. He _ran_ so fast that he _ran himself_ to death." I
strike Thomas, Thomas _strikes David_, Thomas _strikes himself_. Where
is the difference in the action? What matters it whether the action
passes over to another object, or is confined within itself?

"But," says the objector, "you mistake. An intransitive verb is one
where the 'effect is confined within the subject, and does not pass over
to any object.'"

Very well, I think I understand the objection. When Thomas strikes David
the effects of the blow _passes over_ to him. And when he strikes
himself, it "is confined within the subject," and hence the latter is an
_intransitive_ verb.

"No, no; there is an object on which the action terminates, in that
case, and so we must call it a _transitive_ verb."

Will you give me an example of an _intransitive_ verb?

"I _run_, he _walks_, birds _fly_, it _rains_, the fire _burns_. No
objects are expressed after these words, so the action is confined
within themselves."

I now get your meaning. When the object is _expressed_ the verb is
transitive, when it is not it is intransitive. This distinction is
generally observed in teaching, however widely it may differ from the
intention of the makers of grammars. And hence children acquire the
habit of limiting their inquiries to what they see placed before them by
others, and do not think for themselves. When the verb has an objective
word after it _expressed_, they are taught to attach action to it; but
tho the action may be even greater, if the object is not expressed,
they consider the action as widely different in its character, and adopt
the false philosophy that a cause can exist without an effect resulting
from it.

We assume this ground, and we shall labor to maintain it, that every
verb necessarily presupposes an _agent_ or _actor_, an _action_, and an
_object_ acted upon, or affected by the action.

No action, as such, can be known to exist separate from the thing that
acts. We can conceive no idea of action, only by keeping our minds fixed
on the acting substance, marking its changes, movements, and tendencies.
"The book _moves_." In this case the eye rests on the book, and observes
its positions and attitudes, alternating one way and the other. You can
separate no action from the book, nor conceive any idea of it, as a
separate entity. Let the book be taken away. Where now is the action?
What can you think or say of it? There is the same space just now
occupied by the book, but no action is perceivable.

The boy _rolls_ his marble upon the floor. All his ideas of the action
performed by it are derived from an observation of the marble. His eye
follows it as it moves along the floor. He sees it in that acting
condition. When he speaks of the action as a whole, he thinks where it
started and where it stopped. It is of no importance, so far as the verb
is concerned, whether the marble received an impulse from his hand, or
whether the floor was sufficiently inclined to allow it to roll by its
own inherent tendency. The action is, in this case, the obvious change
of the marble.

Our whole knowledge of action depends on an observance of things in a
state of motion, or change, or exerting a tendency to change, or to
counteract an opposing substance.

This will be admitted so far as material things are concerned. The same
principle holds good in reference to every thing of which we form ideas,
or concerning which we use language. In our definition of nouns we spoke
of immaterial and imaginary things to which we gave _names_ and which we
consider as agencies capable of exerting an influence in the production
of effects, or in resisting actions. It is therefore unimportant whether
the action be real or imaginary. It is still inseparably connected with
the thing that acts; and we employ it thus in the construction of
language to express our thoughts. Thus, lions roar; birds sing; minds
reflect; fairies dance; knowledge increases; fancies err; imagination
wanders.

This fact should be borne in mind in all our attempts to understand or
explain language. The mind should remain fixed to the acting substance,
to observe its changes and relations at different periods, and in
different circumstances. There is no other process by which any
knowledge can be gained of actions. The mind contemplates the acting
thing in a condition of change and determines the precise action by the
_altered condition_ of the thing, and thus learns to judge of actions by
their effects. The only method by which we can know whether a _vegetable
grows_ or not is by comparing its form to-day with what it was some days
ago. We can not decide on the improvement of our children only by
observing the same rule.

"By their fruits ye shall know them," will apply in physics as well as
in morals; for we judge of causes only by their effects. First
principles can never be known. We observe things as they _are_, and
remember how they _have been_; and from hence deduce our conclusions in
reference to the _cause_ of things we do not fully understand, or those
consequences which will follow a condition of things as now existing. It
is the business of philosophy to mark these effects, and trace them back
to the causes which produced them, by observing all the intermediate
changes, forms, attitudes, and conditions, in which such things have, at
different times, been placed.

We say, "_trees grow_." But suppose no change had ever been observed in
trees, that they had always been as they now are; in stature as lofty,
in foliage as green and beautiful, in location unaltered. Who would then
say, "trees grow?"

In this single expression a whole train of facts are taken into the
account, tho not particularly marked. As a single expression we imply
that _trees increase their stature_. But this we all know could never be
effected without the influence of other causes. The soil where it stands
must contain properties suited to the _growth_ of the tree. A due
portion of moisture and heat are also requisite. These facts all exist,
and are indispensable to make good the expression that the "tree grows."
We might also trace the capabilities of the tree itself, its roots,
bark, veins or pores, fibres or grains, its succulent and absorbent
powers. But, as in the case of the "man that killed the deer," noticed
in a former lecture, the mind here conceives a single idea of a complete
whole, which is signified by the single expression, "trees grow."

Let the following example serve in further illustration of this point.
Take two bricks, the one heated to a high temperature, the other cold.
Put them together, and in a short time you will find them of equal
temperature. One has grown warm, the other cool. One has _imparted_ heat
and _received_ cold, the other has _received_ heat and _imparted_ cold.
Yet all this would remain forever unknown, but for the effects which
must appear obvious to all. From these effects the causes are to be
learned.

It must, I think, appear plain to all who are willing to see, that
action, as such, can never exist distinct from the thing that acts; that
all our notions of action are derived from an observance of _things_ in
an acting condition; and hence that no words can be framed to express
our ideas of action on any other principle.

I hope you will bear these principles in mind. They are vastly important
in the construction of language, as will appear when we come to speak of
the _agents_ and _objects_ of action. We still adhere to the fact, that
no rules of language can be successfully employed, which deviate from
the permanent laws which operate in the regulation of matter and mind; a
fact which can not be too deeply impressed on your minds.

In the consideration of actions as expressed by verbs, we must observe
that _power_, _cause_, _means_, _agency_, and _effects_, are
indispensable to their existence. Such principles exist _in fact_, and
must be observed in obtaining a complete knowledge of language; for
words, we have already seen, are the expression of ideas, and ideas are
the impression of things.

In our attempts at improvement, we should strip away the covering, and
come at the reality. Words should be measurably forgotten, while we
search diligently for the things expressed by them. _Signs_ should
always conduct to the things _signified_. The weary traveller, hungry
and faint, would hardly satisfy himself with an examination of the
_sign_ before the inn, marking its form, the picture upon it, the nice
shades of coloring in the painting. He would go in, and search for the
thing signified.

It has been the fault in teaching language, that learners have been
limited to the mere _forms_ of words, while the important duty of
teaching them to look at the thing signified, has been entirely
disregarded. Hence they have only obtained book knowledge. They know
what the grammars say; but how to _apply_ what they say, or what is in
reality meant by it, they have yet to learn. This explains the reason
why almost every man who has studied grammar will tell you that "he
_used_ to understand it, but it has all gone from him, for he has not
looked into a _book_ these many years." Has he lost a knowledge of
language? Oh, no, he learned that before he saw a grammar, and will
preserve it to the day of his death. What good did his two or three
years study of grammar do him? None at all; he has forgotten all that he
ever knew of it, and that is not much, for he only learned what some
author said, and a few arbitrary rules and technical expressions which
he could never understand nor apply in practice, except in special
cases. But I wander. I throw in this remark to show you the necessity of
bringing your minds to a close observance of things as they do in truth
exist; and from them you can draw the principles of speech, and be able
to use language correctly. For we still insist on our former opinion,
that all language depends on the permanent laws of nature, as exerted in
the regulation of matter and mind.

       *       *       *

To return. I have said that all action denotes _power_, _cause_,
_means_, _agency_, and _effects_.

       *       *       *

_Power_ depends on _physical energy_, or _mental skill_. I have hinted
at this fact before. Things act according to the power or energy they
possess. Animals walk, birds fly, fishes swim, minerals sink, poisons
kill. Or, according to the adopted theories of naturalists:

Minerals _grow_.

Vegetables _grow_ and _live_.

Animals _grow_, and _live_, and _feel_.

Every thing acts according to the ability it possesses. Man, possessed
of reason, devises means and produces ends. Beasts change locations,
devour vegetables, and sometimes other beasts. The lowest grade of
animals never change location, but yet eat and live. Vegetables live and
grow, but do not change location. They have the power to reproduce their
species, and some of them to kill off surrounding objects. "The
_carraguata_ of the West Indies, clings round," says Goldsmith,
"whatever tree it happens to approach; there it quickly gains the
ascendant, and, loading the tree with a verdure not its own, keeps away
that nourishment designed to feed the trunk, and at last entirely
destroys its supporter." In our country, many gardens and fields present
convincing proof of the ability of weeds to kill out the vegetables
designed to grow therein. You all have heard of the _Upas_, which has a
power sufficient to destroy the lives of animals and vegetables for a
large distance around. Its very exhalations are death to whatever
approaches it. It serves in metaphor to illustrate the noxious effects
of all vice, of slander and deceit, the effects of which are to the
moral constitution, what the tree itself is to natural objects, blight
and mildew upon whatever comes within its reach.

Minerals are possessed of _power_ no less astonishing, which may be
observed whenever an opportunity is offered to call it forth. Active
poisons, able to slay the most powerful men and beasts, lie hid within
their bosoms. They have strong attractive and repelling powers. From the
iron is made the strong cable which _holds_ the vessel fast in her
moorings, _enabling_ it to outride the collected force of the winds and
waves which _threaten_ its destruction. From it also are manufactured
the manacles which bind the strong man, or fasten the lion in his cage.
Gold _possesses_ a power which _charms_ nearly all men to sacrifice
their ease, and too many their moral principles, to pay their blind
devotions at its shrine.

Who will contend that the power of action is confined to the animal
creation alone, and that inanimate matter can not act? That there is a
superior power possessed by man, endowed with an immaterial spirit in a
corporeal body, none will deny. By the agency of the mind he can
accomplish wonders, which mere physical power without the aid of such
mental skill, could never perform. But with all his boasted superiority,
he is often made the slave of inanimate things. His lofty powers of body
and soul bend beneath the weight of accumulated sorrows, produced by the
secret _operations_ of contagious disease, which _slays_ his wife,
children, and friends, who fall like the ripened harvest before the
gatherers scythe. Nay, he often submits to the controlling power of the
vine, alcohol, or tobacco, which _gain_ a secret influence over his
nobler powers, and _fix_ on him the stamp of disgrace, and _throw_
around him fetters from which he finds it no easy matter to extricate
himself. By the illusions of error and vice he is often betrayed, and
long endures darkness and suffering, till he _regains_ his native
energies, and finds deliverance in the enjoyment of truth and virtue.

What is that secret power which lies concealed beyond the reach of
human ken, and is transported from land to land unknown, till exposed in
conditions suited to its operation, will show its active and resistless
force in the destruction of life, and the devastation of whole cities or
nations? You may call it plague, or cholera, or small pox, miasma,
contagion, particles of matter floating in the air surcharged with
disease, or any thing else. It matters not what you call it. It is
sufficient to our present purpose to know that it has the ability to put
forth a prodigious power in the production of consequences, which the
highest skill of man is yet unable to prevent.

I might pursue this point to an indefinite length, and trace the secret
powers possessed by all created things, as exhibited in the influence
they exert in various ways, both as regards themselves and surrounding
objects. But you will at once perceive my object, and the truth of the
positions I assume. A common power pervades all creation, operating by
pure and perfect laws, regulated by the Great First Cause, the Moving
Principle, which guides, governs, and controls the whole.[11]

Degrading indeed must be those sentiments which limit all action to the
animal frame as an organized body, moved by a living principle. Ours is
a sublimer duty; to trace the operations of the Divine Wisdom which acts
thro out all creation, in the minutest particle of dust which _keeps_
its _position_ secure, till moved by some superior power; or in the
_needle_ which points with unerring skill to its fixed point, and
_guides_ the vessel, freighted with a hundred lives, safe thro the
midnight storm, to its destined haven; tho rocked by the waves and
driven by the winds, it remains uninfluenced, and tremblingly alive to
the important duties entrusted to its charge, continues its faithful
service, and is watched with the most implicit confidence by all on
board, as the only guide to safety. The same Wisdom is displayed thro
out all creation; in the beauty, order, and harmony of the universe; in
the planets which float in the azure vault of heaven; in the glow worm
that glitters in the dust; in the fish which cuts the liquid element; in
the pearl which sparkles in the bottom of the ocean; in every thing
that lives, moves, or has a being; but more distinctly in man, created
in the moral image of his Maker, possessed of a heart to feel, and a
mind to understand--the third in the rank of intelligent beings.

I cannot refuse to favor you with a quotation from that inimitable poem,
Pope's Essay on Man. It is rife with sentiment of the purest and most
exalted character. It is direct to our purpose. You may have heard it a
thousand times; but I am confident you will be pleased to hear it again.

      Ask for what end the heavenly bodies shine,
    Earth for whose use? Pride answers, "'Tis for mine:
    "For me kind nature wakes her genial pow'r,
    "Suckles each herb, and spreads out every flow'r;
    "Annual for me, the grape, the rose renew
    "The juice nectareous, and the balmy dew;
    "For me, the mine a thousand treasures brings;
    "For me health gushes from a thousand springs;
    "Seas roll to waft me, suns to light me rise;
    "My footstool earth, my canopy the skies."

      But errs not nature from this gracious end,
    From burning suns when livid deaths descend,
    When earthquakes swallow, or when tempests sweep
    Towns to one grave, whole nations to the deep?
    "_No_," ('tis replied,) "_the first Almighty Cause
    Acts not by partial, but by general laws;
    Th' exceptions few; some change since all began:
    And what created perfect?_" Why then man?
    If the great end be human happiness,
    Then nature deviates--and can man do less?
    As much that end a constant course requires
    Of show'rs and sunshine, as of man's desires;
    As much eternal springs and cloudless skies,
    As man forever temp'rate, calm, and wise.
    If plagues or earthquakes break not heaven's design.
    Why then a Borgia, or a Cataline?
    Who knows but He whose hand the lightning forms,
    Who heaves old ocean, and who wings the storms;
    Pours fierce ambition in a Cæsar's mind;
    Or turns young Ammon loose to scourge mankind?
    From pride, from pride our very reas'ning springs;
    Account for moral as for nat'ral things:
    Why charge we heaven in those, in these acquit?
    In both, to reason right, is to submit.

      Better for us, perhaps, it might appear,
    Were there all harmony, all virtue here;
    That never air or ocean felt the wind;
    That never passion discomposed the mind.
    But =all= subsists by elemental strife;
    And passions are the elements of life.
    The general =order=, since the whole began,
    Is kept in nature, and is kept in man.

       *       *       *       *       *

      Look round our world, behold the chain of love.
    Combining all below and all above;
    See plastic nature working to this end,
    The single atoms each to other tend;
    Attract, attracted to, the next in place
    Formed and impelled its neighbor to embrace,
    See matter next, with various life endued,
    Press to one center still the gen'ral good.
    See dying vegetables life sustain,
    See life dissolving, vegetate again;
    All forms that perish, other forms supply,
    (By turns we catch the vital breath, and die)
    Like bubbles on the sea of matter borne,
    They rise, they break, and to that sea return,
    Nothing is foreign--parts relate to whole;
    One all-extending, all-preserving soul
    Connects each being greatest with the least;
    Made beast in aid of man, and man of beast;
    All served, all serving; nothing stands alone;
    The chain holds on, and where it ends, unknown.

But _power_ alone is not sufficient to produce action. There must be a
=cause= to call it forth, to set in operation and exhibit its latent
energies. It will remain hid in its secret chambers till efficient
causes have set in operation the _means_ by which its existence is to be
discovered in the production of change, effects, or results. There is,
it is said, in every created thing a power sufficient to produce its own
destruction, as well as to preserve its being. In the human body, for
instance, there is a constant tendency to decay, to waste; which a
counteracting power resists, and, with proper assistance, keeps alive.

The same may be said of vegetables which are constantly throwing off, or
exhaling the waste, offensive, or useless matter, and yet a restoring
power, assisted by heat, moisture, and the nourishment of the earth,
resists the tendency to decay and preserves it alive and growing. The
air, the earth, nay, the ocean itself, philosophers assure us, contain
powers sufficient to self-destruction. But I will not enlarge here. Let
the necessary _cause_ be exerted which will give vent to this hidden
power and actions the most astonishing and destructive would be the
effect. These are often witnessed in the tremendous earthquakes which
devastate whole cities, states, and empires; in the tornados which pass,
like the genius of evil, over the land, levelling whatever is found in
its course; or in the waterspouts and maelstroms which prove the grave
of all that comes within their grasp.

In the attempted destruction of the royal family and parliament of
England, by what is usually called the "gunpowder plot," the
arrangements were all made; two hogsheads and thirty-six barrels of
powder, sufficient to blow up the house of lords and the surrounding
buildings, were secreted in a vault beneath it, strown over with
faggots. Guy Fawkes, a spanish officer, employed for the purpose, lay at
the door, on the 5th of November, 1605, with the matches, or _means_, in
his pocket, which should set in operation the prodigious dormant
_power_, which would hurl to destruction James I., the royal family, and
the protestant parliament, give the ascendancy to the Catholics, and
change the whole political condition of the nation. The _project_ was
discovered, the _means_ were removed, the _cause_ taken away, and the
threatened _effects_ were prevented.

The =cause= of action is the immediate subject which precedes or tends
to produce the action, without which it would not take place. It may
result from volition, inherent tendency, or communicated impulse; and is
known to exist from the effects produced by it, in the altered or new
condition of the thing on which it operates; which change would not have
been effected without it.

Causes are to be sought for by tracing back thro the effects which are
produced by them. The factory is put in operation, and the cloth is
manufactured. The careless observer would enter the building and see the
spindles, looms, and wheels operated by the hands, and go away satisfied
that he has seen enough, seen all. But the more careful will look
farther. He will trace each band and wheel, each cog and shaft, down by
the balance power, to the water race and floom; or thro the complicated
machinery of the steam engine to the piston, condenser, water, wood, and
fire; marking a new, more secret, and yet more efficient cause at each
advancing step. But all this curiously wrought machinery is not the
product of chance, operated without care. A superior cause must be
sought in human skill, in the deep and active ingenuity of man. Every
contrivance presupposes a contriver. Hence there must have been a power
and means sufficient to combine and regulate the power of the water, or
generate and direct the steam. That power is vested in man; and hence,
man stands as the cause, in relation to the whole process operated by
wheels, bands, spindles, and looms. Yet we may say, with propriety, that
the water, or the steam; the water-wheel, or the piston; the shafts,
bands, cogs, pullies, spindles, springs, treddles, harnesses, reeds,
shuttles, an almost endless concatenation of instruments, are alike the
_causes_, which tend to produce the final result; for let one of these
intermediate causes be removed, and the whole power will be diverted,
and all will go wrong--the effect will not be produced.

There must be a =first cause= to set in operation all inferior ones in
the production of action; and to that _first_ cause all action, nay, the
existence of all other causes, may be traced, directly, or more distant.
The intervening causes, in the consecutive order of things, may be as
diversified as the links in the chain of variant beings. Yet all these
causes are moved by the all-sufficient and ever present agency of the
Almighty Father, the =Uncaused Cause= of all things and beings; who
spoke into existence the universe with all its various and complicated
parts and orders; who set the sun, moon, and stars in the firmament,
gave the earth a place, and fixed the sea a bed; throwing around them
barriers over which they can never pass. From the height of his eternal
throne, his eye pervades all his works; from the tall archangel, that
"adores and burns," down to the very hairs of our heads, which are all
numbered, his wise, benevolent, and powerful supervision may be traced
in legible lines, which may be seen and read of all men. And from
effects, the most diminutive in character, may be traced back, from
cause to cause, upward in the ascending scale of being, to the same
unrivalled Source of all power, splendor, and perfection, the presence
of Him, who spake, and it was done; who commanded, and it _stood still_;
or, as the poet has it:

    "Look thro nature up to nature's God."

The _means_ of action are those aids which are displayed as the medium
thro which existing causes are to exhibit their hidden powers in
producing changes or effects. The matches in the pocket of Guy Fawkes
were the direct means by which he intended to set in operation a train
of causes which should terminate in the destruction of the house of
lords and all its inmates. Those matches, set on fire, would convey a
spark to the faggots, and thence to the powder, and means after means,
and cause after cause, in the rapid succession of events, would ensue,
tending to a final, inevitable, and melancholy result.

A ball shot from a cannon, receives its first impulse from the powder;
but it is borne thro the air by the aid of a principle inherent in
itself, which power is finally overcome by the density of the atmosphere
which impedes its progress, and the law of gravitation finally attracts
it to the earth. These contending principles may be known by observing
the curved line in which the ball moves from the cannon's mouth to the
spot where it rests. But if there is no power in the ball, why does not
the ball of cork discharged from the same gun with the same momentum,
travel to the same distance, at the same rate? The action commences in
both cases with the same projectile force, the same exterior _means_ are
employed, but the results are widely different. The cause of this
difference must be sought for in the comparative power of each substance
to _continue its own movements_.

Every boy who has played at ball has observed these principles. He
throws his ball, which, if not _counteracted_, will continue in a
straight line, _ad infinitum_--without end. But the air impedes its
progress, and gravitation brings it to the ground. When he throws it
against a hard substance, its velocity is not only overcome, but it is
sent back with great force. But if he takes a ball of wax, of snow, or
any strong adhesive substance, it will not bound. How shall we account
to him for this difference? He did the same with both balls. The impetus
given the one was as great as the other, and the resistance of the
intervening substance was as great in one case as the other; and yet,
one bounds and rebounds, while the other sticks fast as a friend, to the
first object it meets. The cause of this difference is to be sought for
in the different capabilities of the respective balls. One possesses a
strong elastic and repelling power; in the other, the attraction of
cohesion is predominant.

Take another example. Let two substances of equal size and form, the one
made of lead, the other of cork, be put upon the surface of a cistern of
water. The external circumstances are the same, but the effects are
widely different--one sinks, the other floats. We must look for the
cause of this difference, not in the opposite qualities of surrounding
matter, but in the things themselves. If you add to the cork another
quality possessed by the lead, and give it the same form, size, and
_weight_, it will as readily sink to the bottom. But this last property
is possessed in different degrees by the two bodies, and hence, while
the one floats upon the water, the other displaces its particles and
sinks to the bottom. You may take another substance; say the mountain
ebony, which is heavier than water, but lighter than lead, and immerse
it in the water; it will not sink with the rapidity of lead, because its
inherent _power_ is not so strong.

Take still another case. Let two balls, suspended on strings, be
equally, or, to use the technical term, _positively_ electrified. Bring
them within a certain distance, and they will repel each other. Let the
electric fluid be extracted from one, and the other will attract it.
Before, they were as enemies; now they embrace as friends. The magnet
furnishes the most striking proof in favor of the theory we are laboring
to establish. Let one of sufficient power be let down within the proper
distance, it will overcome the power of gravitation, and _attract_ the
heavy steel to itself. What is the cause of this wonderful fact? Who can
account for it? Who can trace out the hidden cause; the "_primum
mobile_" of the Ptolmaic philosophy--the secret spring of motion? But
who will dare deny that such effects do exist, and that they are
produced by an efficient cause? Or who will descend into the still more
dark and perplexing mazes of neuter verb grammars, and deny that matter
has such a power to act?

These instances will suffice to show you what we mean when we say,
_every thing acts according to the ability God has given it to act_. I
might go into a more minute examination of the properties of matter,
affinity, hardness, weight, size, color, form, mobility, &c., which even
old grammars will allow it to _possess_; but I shall leave that work
for you to perform at your leisure.

Whoever has any doubts remaining in reference to the abilities of all
things to _produce_, _continue_, or _prevent_ motion, will do well to
consult the prince of philosophers, Sir Isaac Newton, who, after
Gallileo, has treated largely upon the laws of motion. He asserts as a
fact, full in illustration of the principles I am laboring to establish,
that in ascending a hill, the trace rope pulls the horse back as much as
he draws that forward, only the horse overcomes the resistance of the
load, and moves it up the hill. On the old systems, no power would be
requisite to move the load, for it could oppose no resistance to the
horse; and the small child could move it with as much ease as the strong
team.

Who has not an acquaintance sufficiently extensive to know these things?
I can not believe there is a person present, who does not fully
comprehend my meaning, and discover the correctness of the ground I have
assumed. And it should be borne in mind, that no collection or
arrangement of words can be composed into a sentence, which do not
obtain their meaning from a connection of things as they exist and
operate in the material and intellectual world, and that it is not in
the power of man to frame a sentence, to think or speak, but in
conformity with these general and exceptionless laws.

This important consideration meets us at every advancing step, as if to
admonish us to abandon the vain project of seeking a knowledge of
language without an acquaintance with the great principles on which it
depends. To look for the leading rules of speech in set forms of
expression, or in the capricious customs of any nation, however learned,
is as futile as to attempt to gain a knowledge of the world by shutting
ourselves up in a room, and looking at paintings and drawings which may
be furnished by those who know as little of it as we do. How fallacious
would be the attempt, how much worse than time thrown away, for the
parent to shut up his child in a lonely room, and undertake to impress
upon its mind a knowledge of man, beasts, birds, fish, insects, rivers,
mountains, fields, flowers, houses, cities, &c., with no other aid than
a few miserable pictures, unlike the reality, and in many respects
contradictory to each other. And yet that would be adopting a course
very similar to the one long employed as the only means of acquiring a
knowledge of language; limited to a set of arbitrary, false, and
contradictory rules, which the brightest geniuses could never
understand, nor the most erudite employ in the expression of ideas. The
grammars, it was thought, must be studied to acquire the use of
language, and yet they were forgotten before such knowledge was put in
practice.

       *       *       *       *       *

A simple remark on the principles of _relative_ action, and we will pass
to the consideration of _agents_ and _objects_, or the more immediate
_causes_ and _effects_ of action.

We go forth at the evening hour and look upon the sun _sinking_ beneath
the horizon; we mark the varying hues of light as they appear, and
change, and fade away. We see the shades of night _approaching_, with a
gradual pace, till the beautiful landscape on which we had been gazing,
the hills and the meadows; the farm house and the cultivated fields, the
grove, the orchard, and the garden; the tranquil lake and the babbling
brook; the dairy returning home, and the lambkins gambolling beside
their dams; all _recede_ from our view, and _appear_ to us no longer.
All this is _relative_ action. But so far as language and ideas are
concerned, it matters not whether the sun actually _sinks_ behind the
hills, or the hills interpose between it and us; whether the landscape
_recedes_ from our view, or the shades of night intercept so as to
obscure our vision. The habit of thought is the same, and the form of
expression must agree with it. We say the sun _rises_ and _sets_, in
reference to the obvious fact, without stopping to inquire whether it
really moves or not. Nor is such an inquiry at all necessary, as to
matter of fact, for all we mean by such expressions, is, that by some
process, immaterial to the case in hand, the sun stands in a new
relation to the earth, its altitude is elevated or depressed, and hence
the action is strictly relative. For we should remember that _rising_
and _setting_, _up_ and _down_, _above_ and _below_, in reference to the
earth, are only relative terms.

We speak and read of the _changes_ of the moon, and we correctly
understand each other. But in truth the moon changes no more at one time
than at another. The action is purely relative. One day we observe it
_before_ the sun, and the next _behind_ it, as we understand these
terms. The precise time of the change, when it will appear to us in a
different relation to the sun, is computed by astronomers, and set down
in our almanacs; but it changes no more at that time than at any other,
for like every thing else, it is _always changing_.

In a case we mentioned in a former lecture, "John _looks_ like or
_resembles_ his brother," we have an example of relative action. So in
the case of two men travelling the same way, starting together, but
advancing at different rates; one, we say, _falls_ behind the other. In
this manner of expression, we follow exactly the principles on which we
started, and suit our language to our ideas and habits of thinking. By
the law of optics things are reflected upon the retina of the eye
inversely, that is, upside down; but they are always seen in a proper
relation to each other, and if there is any thing wrong in the case, it
is overcome by early habit; and so our language accords with things as
they are manifested to our understandings.

These examples will serve to illustrate what we mean by relative action,
when applied to natural philosophy or the construction of language.

I had intended in this lecture to have treated of the agents and objects
of verbs, to prove, in accordance with the first and closest principles
of philosophy, that every "_cause_ must have an _effect_," or, in other
words, that every action must terminate on some object, either expressed
or necessarily understood; but I am admonished that I have occupied more
than my usual quota of time in this lecture already, and hence I shall
leave this work for our next.

I will conclude by the relation of an anecdote or two from the life of
that wonderful man, Gallileo Gallilei, who was many years professor of
mathematics at Padua. Possessed of a strong, reflecting mind, he had
early given his attention to the observation of things, their motions,
tendencies, and power of resistance, from which he ascended, step by
step, to the sublime science of astronomy. Being of an honest and frank,
as well as benevolent disposition, he shunned not to state and defend
theories at war with the then received opinions. All learning was, at
that time, in the hands or under the supervision of the ecclesiastics,
who were content to follow blindly the aristotelian philosophy, which,
in many respects, was not unlike that still embraced in our _neuter verb
systems_ of grammar. There was a sworn hostility against all
improvement, or innovation as it was called, in science as well as in
theology. The copernican system, to which Gallileo was inclined, if it
had not been formally condemned, had been virtually denounced as false,
and its advocates heretical. Hence Gallileo never dared openly to defend
it, but, piece by piece, under different names, he brought it forth,
which, carried out, would establish the heretical system. Dwelling as a
light in the midst of surrounding darkness, he cautiously discovered the
precious truths revealed to his mind, lest the flood of light should
distract and destroy the mental vision, break up the elements of
society, let loose the resistless powers of ignorance, prejudice and
bigotry, and envelope himself and friends in a common ruin. At length
having prepared in a very guarded manner his famous "Dialogues on the
Ptolmaic and Copernican Systems," he obtained permission, and ventured
to publish it to the world, altho an edict had been promulgated
enjoining silence on the subject, and he had been personally instructed
"_not to believe or teach the motion of the earth in any manner_."

By the false representation of his enemies, suspicions were aroused and
busily circulated prejudicial to Gallileo. Pope Urban himself, his
former friend, became exasperated towards him, and a sentence against
him and his books was fulminated by the Cardinals, prohibiting the "sale
and vending of the latter, and condemning him to the formal prison of
the Holy Office for a period determined at their pleasure." The sentence
of the Inquisition was in part couched in these words--"We pronounce,
judge, and declare, that you, the said Gallileo, by reason of these
things, which have been detailed in the course of this investigation,
and which, as above, you have confessed, have rendered yourself
vehemently suspected by this Holy Office, of heresy; that is to say,
that you believe and hold the false doctrine, and contrary to the Holy
and Divine Scriptures, namely, that the sun is the center of the world,
and that it does not _move_ from east to west, and that the earth does
_move_, and is not the center of the world; also, that an opinion _can
be held_ and _supported_ as _probable_, _after it has been_ declared,
and finally decreed contrary to the Holy Scriptures"--by the Holy See!!
"From which," they continue, "it is _our_ pleasure that you be absolved,
provided that, first, with a _sincere_ heart, and _unfeigned faith_, in
our presence, you _abjure_, _curse_, and _detest_ the said errors and
heresies, and every other error and heresy contrary to the Catholic and
Apostolic Church of Rome, in the form now shown to you."

After suffering under this anathema some time, Gallileo, by the advice
of his friends, consented to make a public abjuration of his former
heresies on the laws of motion. Kneeling before the "Most Eminent and
Most Reverend Lords Cardinals, General Inquisitors of the universal
Christian republic, against _heretical depravity_, having before his
eyes the Holy Gospels," he swears that he always "_believed_, and now
_believes_, and with the help of God, _will in future believe_, every
article which the Holy Catholic Church of Rome holds, teaches, and
preaches"--that he does altogether "abandon the false opinion which
maintains that the 'sun is the center of the world, and that the earth
is _not_ the center and _movable_,' that with a sincere heart and
unfeigned faith, he abjures, curses, and detests the said errors and
heresies, and every other error and sect contrary to the said Holy
Church, and that he will never more in future, say or assert any thing
verbally, or in writing, which may give rise to similar suspicion." As
he arose from his knees, it is said, he whispered to a friend standing
near him, "_E pur si muove_"--=it does move, tho=.

In our times we are not fated to live under the terrors of the
Inquisition; but prejudice, if not as strong in power to execute, has
the ability to blind as truly as in other ages, and keep us from the
knowledge and adoption of practical improvements. And it is the same
philosophy now, which _asks_ if _inanimate matter can act_, which
_demanded_ of Gallileo if this ponderous globe could fly a thousand
miles in a minute, and no body feel the motion; and with Deacon
Homespun, in the dialogue, "why, if this world turned upside down, the
water did not spill from the mill ponds, and all the people fall
headlong to the bottomless pit?"

If there are any such peripatetics in these days of light and science,
who still cling to the false and degrading systems of neutrality,
because they are honorable for age, or sustained by learned and good
men, and who will oppose all improvement, reject without examination,
or, what is still worse, refuse to adopt, after being convinced of the
truth of it, any system, because it is novel, an innovation upon
established forms, I can only say of them, in the language of Micanzio,
the Venetian friend of Gallileo--"The efforts of such enemies to get
these principles prohibited, will occasion no loss either to your
reputation, or to the intelligent part of the world. As to posterity,
this is just one of the surest ways to hand them down to them. But what
a wretched set this must be, to whom every good thing, and _all that is
found in nature_, necessarily appears hostile and odious."




LECTURE X.

ON VERBS.

    A philosophical axiom.--Manner of expressing action.--Things taken
    for granted.--Simple facts must be known.--Must never deviate from
    the truth.--Every _cause_ will have an _effect_.--An example of an
    intransitive verb.--Objects expressed or implied.--All language
    eliptical.--Intransitive verbs examined.--I run.--I walk.--To
    step.--Birds fly.--It rains.--The fire burns.--The sun shines.--To
    smile.--Eat and drink.--Miscellaneous examples.--Evils of false
    teaching.--A change is demanded.--These principles apply
    universally.--Their importance.


We have made some general remarks on the power, cause, and means,
necessary in the production of action. We now approach nearer to the
application of these principles as observed in the immediate _agency_
and _effects_ which precede and follow action, and as connected with the
verb.

It is an axiom in philosophy which cannot be controverted, that every
_effect_ is the product of a prior _cause_, and that every _cause_ will
necessarily produce a corresponding _effect_. This fact has always
existed and will forever remain unchanged. It applies universally in
physical, mental, and moral science; to God or man; to angels or to
atoms; in time or thro eternity. No language can be constructed which
does not accord with it, for no ideas can be gained but by an observance
of its manifestations in the material or spiritual universe. The manner
of _expressing_ this cause and effect may differ in different nations or
by people of the same nation, but the fact remains unaltered, and so
far as understood the idea is the same. In the case of the horse
mentioned in a former lecture,[12] the idea was the same, but the manner
of expressing it different. Let that horse _walk_, _lay_ down, _roll_
over, _rise_ up, _shake_ himself, _rear_, or _stand_ still, all present
will observe the same attitude of the horse, and will form the same
ideas of his positions. Some will doubtless inquire more minutely into
the _cause_ and _means_ by which these various actions are produced,
what muscles are employed, what supports are rendered by the bones; and
the whole regulated by the will of the horse, and their conclusions may
be quite opposite. But this has nothing to do with the obvious fact
expressed by the words above; or, more properly, it is not necessary to
enter into a minute detail of these minor considerations, these secret
springs of motion, in order to relate the actions of the horse. For were
we to do this we should be required to go back, step by step, and find
the causes still more numerous, latent, and perplexing. The pursuit of
causes would lead us beyond the mere organization of the horse, his
muscular energy, and voluntary action; for gravitation has no small
service to perform in the accomplishment of these results; as well as
other principles. Let gravitation be removed, and how could the horse
_lay_ down? He could _roll_ over as well in the air as upon the ground.
But the particular notice of these things is unnecessary in the
construction of language to express the actions of the horse; for he
stands as the obvious _agent_ of the whole, and the _effects_ are seen
to follow--the _horse_ is laid down, _his body_ is rolled over, _the
fore part_ of it is _reared up_, _himself_ is shaken, and the whole
_feat_ is produced by the direction of his master.

Allow me to recal an idea we considered in a former lecture. I said no
action as such could be known distinct from the thing which acts; that
action as such is not perceptible, and that all things act, according to
the ability they possess. To illustrate this idea: Take a magnet and
lower it down over a piece of iron, till it attracts it to itself and
holds it suspended there. If you are not in possession of a magnet you
can make one at your pleasure, by the following process. Lay your knife
blade on a flat iron, or any hard, smooth surface; let another take the
old tongs or other iron which have stood erect for a considerable length
of time, and draw it upon the blade for a minute or more. A magnetic
power will be conveyed from the tongs to the blade sufficient to take up
a common needle. The tongs themselves may be manufactured into a most
perfect magnet. Now as the knife _holds_ the needle suspended beneath it
you perceive there must be an action, a power, and cause exerted beyond
our comprehension. Let the magnetic power be extracted from the blade,
and the needle will drop to the floor. A common unmagnetized blade will
not _raise_ and _hold_ a needle as this does. How those tongs come in
possession of such astonishing power; by what process it is there
retained; the power and means of transmission of a part of it to the
knife blade, and the reason of the phenomena you now behold--an
inanimate blade drawing to itself and there holding this needle
suspended--will probably long remain unknown to mortals. But that such
are the facts, incontestibly true, none will deny, for the evidence is
before us. Now fix your attention on that needle. There is an active and
_acting_ principle in that as well as in the magnetized blade; for the
blade will not attract a splinter of wood, of whalebone, or piece of
glass, tho equal in size and weight. It will have no operation on them.
Then it is by a sort of mutual affinity, a reciprocity of attachment,
between the blade and needle, that this phenomena is produced.

To apply this illustration you have only to reverse the case--turn the
knife and needle over--and see all things attracted to the earth by the
law of gravitation, a principle abiding in all matter. All that renders
the exhibition of the magnet curious or wonderful is that it is an
uncommon condition of things, an apparent counteraction of the regular
laws of nature. But we should know that the same sublime principle is
constantly operating thro out universal nature. Let that be suspended,
cease its active operations for a moment, and our own earth will be
decomposed into particles; the sun, moon and stars will dissolve and
mingle with the common dust; all creation will crumble into atoms, and
one vast ocean of darkness and chaos will fill the immensity of space.

Are you then prepared to deny the principles for which we are
contending? I think you will not; but accede the ground, that such being
the fact, true in nature, language, correctly explained, is only the
medium by which the ideas of these great truths, may be conveyed from
one mind to another, and must correspond therewith. If language is the
sign of ideas, and ideas are the impressions of things, it follows of
necessity, that no language can be employed unless it corresponds with
these natural laws, or first principles. The untutored child cannot talk
of these things, nor comprehend our meaning till clearly explained to
it. But some people act as tho they thought children must first acquire
a knowledge of words, and then begin to learn what such words mean.
This is putting the "cart before the horse."

Much, in this world, is to be taken for granted. We can not enter into
the minutiæ of all we would express, or have understood. We go upon the
ground that other people know something as well as we, and that they
will exercise that knowledge while listening to our relation of some new
and important facts. Hence it is said that "brevity is the soul of wit."
But suppose you should talk of surds, simple and quadratic equations,
diophantine problems, and logarithms, to a person who knows nothing of
proportion or relation, addition or subtraction. What would they know
about your words? You might as well give them a description in Arabic or
Esquimaux. They must first learn the simple rules on which the whole
science of mathematics depends, before they can comprehend a
dissertation on the more abstruse principles or distant results. So
children must learn to observe things as they are, in their simplest
manifestations, in order to understand the more secret and sublime
operations of nature. And our language should always be adapted to their
capacities; that is, it should agree with their advancement. You may
talk to a zealot in politics of religion, the qualities of forbearance,
candor, and veracity; to the enthusiast of science and philosophy; to
the bigot of liberality and improvement; to the miser of benevolence and
suffering; to the profligate of industry and frugality; to the
misanthrope of philanthropy and patriotism; to the degraded sinner of
virtue, truth, and heaven; but what do they know of your meaning? How
are they the wiser for your instruction? You have touched a cord which
does not vibrate thro their hearts, or, phrenologically, addressed an
organ they do not possess, except in a very moderate degree, at least.
Food must be seasoned to the palates of those who use it. Milk is for
babes and strong meat for men. Our instruction must be suited to the
capacities of those we would benefit, always elevated just far enough
above them to attract them along the upward course of improvement.

But it should be remembered that evils will only result from a deviation
from truth, and that we can never be justified in doing wrong because
others have, or for the sake of meeting them half way. And yet this very
course is adopted in teaching, and children are learned to adopt certain
technical rules in grammar, not because they are _true_, but because
they are _convenient_! In fact, it is said by some, that language is an
arbitrary affair altogether, and is only to be taught and learned
mechanically! But who would teach children that _seven times seven_ are
_fifty_, and _nine times nine_ a _hundred_, and assign as a reason for
so doing, that _fifty_ and a _hundred_ are more easily remembered than
_forty-nine_ and _eighty-one_? Yet there would be as much propriety in
adopting such a principle in mathematics, as in teaching for a rule of
grammar that when an objective case comes after a verb, it is active;
but when there is none expressed, it is intransitive or neuter.

The great fault is, grammarians do not allow themselves to _think_ on
the subject of language, or if they do, they only think intransitively,
that is, produce no _thoughts_ by their cogitations.

This brings us to a more direct consideration of the subject before us.
All admit the correctness of the axiom that every effect must have a
cause, and that every cause will have an effect. It is equally true that
"_like causes will produce like effects_," a rule from which nature
itself, and thought, and language, can never deviate. It is as plain as
that two things mutually equal to each other, are equal to a third. On
this immutable principle we base our theory of the activity of all
verbs, and contend that they must have an object after them, either
expressed or _necessarily understood_. We can not yield this position
till it is proved that _causes_ can operate without producing effects,
which can never be till the order of creation is reversed! There never
was, to our knowledge, such a thing as an intransitive action, with the
solitary exception of the burning bush.[13] In that case the laws of
nature were suspended, and no effects were produced; for the _bush
burned_, but there was nothing burnt; no consequences followed to the
bush; it was not consumed. The records of the past present no instance
of like character, where effects have failed to follow, direct or more
distantly, every cause which has been set in operation.

It makes no difference whether the object of the action is expressed or
not. It is the same in either case. But where it is not necessarily
implied from the nature and fitness of things, it must be expressed, and
but for such object or effect the action could not be understood. For
example, _I run_; but if there is no effect produced, _nothing_ run, how
can it be known whether I run or not. If I write, it is necessarily
understood that I write _something_--a _letter_, a _book_, a _piece_ of
poetry, a _communication_, or some other _writing_. When such object is
not liable to be mistaken, it would be superfluous to express it--it
would be a redundancy which should be avoided by all good writers and
speakers. All languages are, in this respect, more or less eliptical,
which constitutes no small share of their beauty, power, and elegance.

This elipsis may be observed not only in regard to the objects of
verbs, but in the omission of many nouns after adjectives, which thus
assume the character of nouns; as, the Almighty, the Eternal, the
Allwise, applied to God, understood. So we say the wise, the learned,
the good, the faithful, the wicked, the vile, the base, to which, if
nouns, it would sound rather harsh to apply plurals. So we say, take
your hat off ( ); put your gloves on ( ); lay your coat off ( ); and
pull your boots on ( ); presuming the person so addressed knows enough
to fill the elipsis, and not take his hat off his back, pull his gloves
on his feet, or his boots on his head.

In pursuing this subject farther, let us examine the sample words which
are called _intransitive_ verbs, because frequently used without the
object expressed after them; such as run, walk, step, fly, rain, snow,
burn, roll, shine, smiles, &c.

"_I run._"

That here is an action of the first kind, none will deny. But it is
contended by the old systems that there is no object on which the action
terminates. If that be true then there is _nothing_ run, no effect
produced, and the first law of nature is outraged, in the very onset;
for there is a _cause_, but no _effect_; an _action_, but no _object_.
How is the fact? Have you run nothing? conveyed nothing, moved nothing
from one place to another? no change, no effect, nothing moved? Look at
it and decide. It is said that a neuter or intransitive verb may be
known from the fact that it takes after it a preposition. Try it by this
rule. "A man run _against_ a post in a dark night, and broke his neck;"
that is, he run nothing against a post--no object to run--and yet he
broke his neck. Unfortunate man!

The fact in relation to this verb is briefly this: It is used to
express the action which more usually terminates on the actor, than on
any other object. This circumstance being generally known, it would be
superfluous to mention the object, except in cases where such is not the
fact. But whenever we desire to be definite, or when there is the least
liability to mistake the object, it is invariably expressed. Instances
of this kind are numerous. "They _ran_ the _boat_ ashore." "The captain
_ran_ his _men_ to rescue them from the enemy." "They _ran_ the
_gauntlet_." "They _run_ a _stage_ to Boston." "He _ran himself_ into
discredit." "One bank _runs_ another." "The man had a hard _run_ of it."
"_Run_ the _account_ over, and see if it is right." "They _run forty
looms_ and two thousand spindles." "He _runs_ his _mill_ evenings." Such
expressions are common and correct, because they convey ideas, and are
understood.

Two men were engaged in argument. The believer in intransitive verbs set
out to _run his opponent_ into an evident absurdity, and, contrary to
his expectation, he _ran himself_ into one. Leave out the objects of
this verb, run, and the sense is totally changed. He set out to _run_
into an _evident absurdity_, and he ran into one; that is, he did the
very absurd thing which he intended to do.[14]

"_I walk._"

The action expressed by this verb is very similar in character to the
former, but rather _slower_ in performance. Writers on health tell us
that _to walk_ is a very healthy exercise, and that it would be well for
men of sedentary habits _to walk_ several miles every day. But if there
is no action in walk, or if it has no _object_ necessarily _walked_, it
would be difficult to understand what good could result from it.

"Did you have a pleasant _walk_ this morning?" says a teacher to his
grammar class.

"We did have a very pleasant one. The flowers were _blooming_ on each
side of the _walk_, and _sent_ forth their sweetest aroma, _perfuming_
the soft breezes of the morning. Birds were _flitting from_ spray to
spray, _carolling_ their hymns of praise to Deity. The tranquil waters
of the lake lay _slumbering_ in silence, and _reflected_ the bright
_rays_ of the sun, _giving_ a sweet but solemn _aspect_ to the whole
scene. _To go_ thro the grove, down by the lake, and up thro the meadow,
is the most delightful _walk_ a person can take."

"How did you get your _walk_?"

"We walked it, to be sure; how did you think we got it?"

"Oh, I did not know. _Walk_, your books tell you, is an intransitive
verb, terminating on no object; so I supposed, if you followed them, you
obtained it some other way; by _riding_, _running_, _sailing_, or, may
be, _bought_ it, as you could not have _walked it_! Were you tired on
your return?"

"We were exceedingly fatigued, for you know it is a very long _walk_,
and we _walked it_ in an hour."

"But _what_ tired you? If there are no effects produced by walking, I
can not conceive why _you_ should be fatigued by such exercise."

Who does not perceive what flagrant violations of grammar rules are
committed every day, and every hour, and in almost every sentence that
is framed to express our knowledge of facts.

_To step._

This verb is the same in character with the two just noticed. It
expresses the act of _raising_ each foot alternately, and usually
implies that the body is, by that means, conveyed from one place to
another. But as people _step_ their _feet_ and not their hands, or any
thing else, it is entirely useless to mention the object; for generally,
that can not be mistaken any more than in the case of the gloves, boots,
and hat. But it would be bad philosophy to teach children that there is
no objective word after it, because it is not written out and placed
before their eyes. They will find such teaching contradicted at every
_step_ they take. Let a believer in intransitive verbs _step_ on a red
hot iron; he will soon find to his sorrow, that he was mistaken when he
thought that he could _step_ without stepping any thing. It would be
well for grammar, as well as many other things, to have more practice
and less theory. The thief was detected by his steps. Step softly; put
your feet down carefully.

_Birds fly._

We learned from our primers, that

    "The eagle's _flight_
    Is out of sight,"

How did the eagle succeed in producing a _flight_? I suppose he _flew_
it. And if birds ever fly, they must produce a flight. Such being the
fact, it is needless to supply the object. But the action does not
terminate solely on the flight produced, for that is only the name given
to the action itself. The expression conveys to the mind the obvious
fact, that, by strong muscular energy, by the aid of feathers, and the
atmosphere, the bird carries itself thro the air, and changes its being
from one place to another. As birds rarely fly a race, or any thing but
_themselves_ and a _flight_, it is not necessary to suffix the object.

_It rains._

This verb is insisted on as the strongest proof of intransitive action;
with what propriety, we will now inquire. It will serve as a clear
elucidation of the whole theory of intransitive verbs.

What does the expression signify? It simply declares the fact, that
_water is shed_ down from the clouds. But is there no object after
_rains_? There is none expressed. Is there nothing rained? no effect
produced? If not, there can be no water fallen, and our cisterns would
be as empty, our streams as low, and fields as parched, after a rain as
before it! But who that has common sense, and has never been blinded by
the false rules of grammar, does not know that when _it rains_, it never
fails to _rain rain_, _water_, or _rain-water_, unless you have one of
the paddy's dry rains? When it hails, it hails _hail_, _hail-stones_, or
frozen _rain_. When it snows, it _snows snow_, sometimes two feet of it,
sometimes less. I should think teachers in our northern countries would
find it exceeding difficult to convince their readers that snow is an
intransitive verb--that it snows _nothing_. And yet so it is; people
will remain wedded to their old systems, and refuse to open their eyes
and behold the evidences every where around them. Teachers themselves,
the guides of the young--and I blush to say it, for I was long among the
number--have, with their scholars, labored all the morning, breaking
roads, _shovelling snow_, and clearing paths, to get to the
school-house, and then set down and taught them that _to snow_ is an
_in_transitive verb. What nonsense; nay, worse, what falsehoods have
been instilled into the youthful mind in the name of grammar! Can we be
surprised that people have not understood grammar? that it is a dry,
cold, and lifeless business?

I once lectured in Poughkeepsie, N. Y. In a conversation with Miss B., a
distinguished scholar, who had taught a popular female school for twenty
years; was remarking upon the subject of intransitive verbs, and the
apparent inconsistency of the new system, that all verbs must have an
object after them, expressed or understood; she said, "there was the
verb _rain_, (it happened to be a rainy day,) the whole action is
confined to the agent; it does not pass on to another object; it is
purely intransitive." Her aged mother, who had never looked into a
grammar book, heard the conversation, and very bluntly remarked, "Why,
you fool you, I want to know if you have studied grammar these thirty
years, and taught it more than twenty, and have never _larned_ that when
it rains it _always_ rains _rain_? If it didn't, do you s'pose you'd
need an umbrella to go out now into the storm? I should think you'd know
better. I always told you these plaguy grammars were good for nothing, I
didn't b'lieve." "Amen," said I, to the good sense of the old lady, "you
are right, and have reason to be thankful that you have never been
initiated into the intricate windings, nor been perplexed with the false
and contradictory rules, which have blasted many bright geniuses in
their earliest attempts to gain a true knowledge of the sublime
principles of language, on which depends so much of the happiness of
human life." The good matron's remark was a poser to the daughter, but
it served as a means of her entire deliverance from the thraldom of
neuter verbs, and the adoption of the new principles of the exposition
of language.

The anecdote shows us how the unsophisticated mind will observe facts,
and employ words as correctly, if not more so, than those schooled in
the high pretensions of science, falsely taught. Who does not know from
the commonest experience, that the direct object of _raining_ must
follow as the necessary sequence? that it can never fail? And yet our
philologists tell us that such is not always the case; and that the
exception is to be marked on the singular ground, whether the word is
written out or omitted! What a narrow view of the sublime laws of
motion! What a limited knowledge of things! or else, what a _mistake_!

"Then the Lord said unto Moses, behold, I will _rain_ bread for you from
heaven."

"Then the _Lord rained_ down, upon Sodom and Gomorrah, _brimstone_ and
_fire_, from the Lord out of heaven."--_Bible._

_The fire burns._

The fire _burns_ the wood, the coal, or the peat. The great fire in
New-York _burned_ the buildings which covered fifty-two acres of ground.
Mr. Experiment _burns_ coal in preference to wood. His new grate _burns
it_ very finely. Red ash coal _burns_ the best; it _makes_ the fewest
_ashes_, and hence _is_ the most convenient. The cook _burns_ too much
fuel. The house took fire and _burned_ up. _Burned what_ up? Burn is an
intransitive verb. It would not trouble the unfortunate tenant to know
that there must be an _object burned_, or what _it_ was. He would find
it far more difficult to rebuild his _house_. Do you suppose fires never
burn any thing belonging to neuter verb folks? Then they never need pay
away insurance money. With the solitary exception I have mentioned--the
burning bush--this verb can not be intransitive.

_The sun shines._

This is an intransitive verb if there ever was one, because the object
is not often expressed after it. But if the sun _emits_ no _rays_ of
light, how shall it be known whether it shines or not? "The _radiance_
of the sun's bright beaming" is produced by the _exhibition_ of
_itself_, when it _brightens_ the objects exposed to its _rays_ or
_radiance_. We talk of _sun shine_ and moon shine, but if these bodies
never produce _effects_ how shall it be known whether such things are
real? _Sun shine_ is the direct effect of the sun's _shining_. But
clouds sometimes intervene and prevent the rays from extending to the
earth; but _then_ we do not say "the sun _shines_." You see at once,
that all we know or can know of the fact we state as truth, is derived
from a knowledge of the very _effects_ which our grammars tell us do not
exist. Strange logic indeed! It is a mark of a wiser man, and a better
scholar, not to know the popular grammars, than it is to profess any
degree of proficiency in them!

_To smile._

The _smiles_ of the morning, the _smiles_ of affection, a _smile_ of
kindness, are only produced by the appearance of something that _smiles_
upon us. _Smiles_ are the direct consequence of _smiling_. If a person
should _smile_ ever so _sweetly_ and yet present no _smiles_, they
might, for aught we could know to the contrary, be _sour_ as vinegar.

But this verb frequently has another object after it; as, "to _smile_
the _wrinkles_ from the brow of age," or "_smile_ dull _cares_ away." "A
sensible wife would soon _reason_ and _smile him_ into good nature."

But I need not multiply examples. When such men as Johnson, Walker,
Webster, Murray, Lowthe, and a host of other wise and renowned men,
gravely tell us that _eat_ and _drink_, which they define, "to _take
food_; _to feed_; _to take a meal_; _to go to meals_; to be maintained
in food; _to swallow liquors_; _to quench thirst_; to take any liquid;"
are _intransitive_ or _neuter_ verbs, having no objects after them, we
must think them insincere, egregiously mistaken, or else possessed of a
means of subsistence different from people generally! Did they _eat_ and
_drink_, "take food and swallow liquors," _in_transitively; that is,
without _eating_ or _drinking_ any thing? Is it possible in the nature
of things? Who does not see the absurdity? And yet they were _great_
men, and nobody has a right to question such _high_ authority. And the
"_simplifiers_" who have come after, making books and teaching grammar
to _earn_ their _bread_, have followed close in their footsteps, and, I
suppose, _eaten_ nothing, and thrown their bread away! Was I a believer
in neuter verbs and desired to get money, my first step would be to set
up a boarding house for all believers in, and _practisers_ of,
intransitive verbs. I would board cheap and give good fare. I could
afford it, for no provisions would be consumed.

Some over cautious minds, who are always second, if not last, in a good
cause, ask us why these principles, if so true and clear, were not found
out before? Why have not the learned who have studied for many
centuries, never seen and adopted them? It is a sufficient answer to
such a question, to ask why the copernican system of astronomy was not
sooner adopted, why the principles of chemistry, the circulation of the
blood, the power and application of steam, nay, why all improvement was
not known before. When grammar and dictionary makers, those wise
expounders of the principles of speech, have so far forgotten facts as
to teach that _eat_ and _drink_, "express neither action nor passion,"
or are "confined to the agents;" that when a man eats, he eats nothing,
or when he drinks, he drinks nothing, we need not stop long to decide
why these things were unknown before. The wisest may sometimes mistake;
and the proud aspirant for success, frequently passes over, unobserved,
the humble means on which all true success depends.

Allow me to quote some miscellaneous examples which will serve to show
more clearly the importance of supplying the elipses, in order to
comprehend the meaning of the writers, or profit by their remarks. You
will supply the objects correctly from the attendant circumstances where
they are not expressed.

"Ask ( ) and ye shall receive ( ); seek ( ) and ye shall find ( ); knock
( ) and _it_ shall be opened unto you."

Ask _what_? Seek _what_? Knock _what_? That _it_ may be opened? Our
"Grammars Made Easy" would teach us to _ask_ and _seek_ nothing! no
objectives after them. What then could we reasonably expect to _receive_
or _find_? The _thing_ we _asked_ for, of course, and that was nothing!
Well might the language apply to such, "Ye ask ( ) and _receive not_
(naught) because ye ask ( ) amiss." False teaching is as pernicious to
religion and morals as to science.

"Charge them that are rich in this world--that they _do good_, that they
be rich in good works, ready to _distribute_ ( ), willing to
_communicate_ ( )."--_Paul to Timothy._

The hearer is to observe that there is no object after these
words--_nothing_ distributed, or communicated! There is too much such
charity in the world.

"He spoke ( ), and _it_ was done; he commanded ( ), and _it_ stood
fast."

"_Bless_ ( ), and _curse_ ( ) not."--_Bible._

"_Strike_ ( ) while the iron is hot."--_Proverb._

"I _came_ ( ), I _saw_ ( ), I _conquered_ ( )."--_Cæsar's Letter._

He lives ( ) contented and happy.

"The _life_ that I now _live_, in the flesh, I _live_ by the faith of
the son of God."--_Paul._

"Let me _die_ the _death_ of the righteous, and let my last _end be_
like his."--_Numbers._

As bodily exercise particularly strengthens ( ), as it invites ( ) to
sleep ( ), and secures ( ) against great disorders, it is to be
generally encouraged. Gymnastic exercises may be established for all
ages and for all classes. The Jews were ordered to _take a walk_ out of
the city on the Sabbath day; and here rich and poor, young and old,
master and slave, met ( ) and indulged ( ) in innocent mirth or in the
pleasures of friendly intercourse.--_Spurzheim on Education._

"Men will wrangle ( ) for religion; write ( ) for it; fight ( ) for it;
die ( ) for it; any thing but live ( ) for it."--_Lacon._

"I have addressed this volume to those that think ( ), and some may
accuse me of an ostentatious independence, in presuming ( ) to inscribe
a book to so small a minority. But a volume addressed to those that
think ( ) is in fact addressed to all the world; for altho the
proportion of those who _do_ ( ) think ( ) be extremely small, yet every
individual _flatters himself_ that he is one of the number."--_Idem._

What is the difference whether a man _thinks_ or not, if he produces no
_thoughts_?

"He that _thinks himself_ the happiest man, really is so; but he that
_thinks himself_ the wisest, is generally the greatest fool."--_Idem._

"A man _has_ many _workmen employed_; some to plough ( ) and sow ( ),
others to chop ( ) and split ( ); some to mow ( ) and reap ( ); one to
score ( ) and hew ( ); two to frame ( ) and raise ( ). In his factory he
has persons to card ( ), spin ( ), reel ( ), spool ( ), warp ( ), and
weave ( ), and a clerk to deliver ( ) and charge ( ), to receive ( ) and
pay ( ). They eat ( ), and drink ( ), heartily, three times a day; and
as they work ( ) hard, and feel ( ) tired at night, they lay ( ) down,
sleep ( ) soundly, and dream ( ) pleasantly; they rise ( ) up early to
go ( ) to work ( ) again. In the morning the children wash ( ) and dress
( ) and prepare ( ) to go ( ) to school, to learn ( ) to read ( ), write
( ), and cipher ( )." All neuter or intransitive verbs!!

"The celebrated horse, Corydon, will perform ( ) on Tuesday evening in
the circus. He will leap ( ) over four bars, separately, in imitation of
the english hunter. He will lie ( ) down, and rise ( ) up instantly at
the _word of command_. He will move ( ) backwards and sideways, rear ( )
and stand ( ) on his hind feet; he will sit ( ) down, like a Turk, on a
cushion. To conclude ( ), he will leap ( ), in a surprising manner, over
two horses."--_Cardell's Grammar._

The gymnastic is not a mountebank; he palms off no legerdemain upon the
public. He will stretch a line across the room, several feet from the
floor, over which he will leap ( ) with surprising dexterity. He will
stand ( ) on his head, balance, ( ) on one foot, and swing ( ) from side
to side of the room; lay ( ) crosswise, and sideways; spring ( ) upon
his feet; bound ( ) upon the floor; dance ( ) and keel ( ) over with out
touching his hands. He will sing ( ), play ( ), and mimic ( ); look ( )
like a king, and act ( ) like a fool. He will laugh ( ) and cry ( ), as
if real; roar ( ) like a lion, and chirp ( ) like a bird. To conclude
( ): He will do all this to an audience of neuter grammarians, without
either "_action_ or _passion_," all the while having a "_state of
being_," motionless, in the center of the room!!

What a lie! say you. _A lie?_ I hope you do not accuse _me_ of lying. If
there is any thing false in this matter it all _lies_ in the quotation,
at the conclusion, from the standard grammar. If that is false, whose
fault is it? Not mine, certainly. But what if I should _lie_ ( ),
intransitively? I should tell no falsehoods.

But enough of this. If there is any thing irrational or inconsistent,
any thing false or ridiculous, in this view of the subject, it should be
remembered that it has been long taught, not only in common schools, but
in our academies and colleges, as serious, practical truth; as the only
means of acquiring a correct knowledge of language, or fitting ourselves
for usefulness or respectability in society. You smile at such trash,
and well you may; but you must bear in mind that grammar is not the only
thing in which we may turn round and _laugh_ ( ) at past follies.

But I am disposed to consider this matter of more serious consequence
than to deserve our _laughter_. When I see the rising generation spend
months and years of the best and most important part of their lives,
which should be devoted to the acquisition of that which is true and
useful, studying the dark and false theory of language as usually
taught, I am far from feeling any desire to laugh at the folly which
imposes such a task upon them. I remember too distinctly the years that
have just gone by. I have seen too many blighted hopes, too many
wearisome hours, too many sad countenances, too many broken resolutions;
to say nothing of corporeal chastisements; to think it a small matter
that children are erroneously taught the rudiments of language, because
sanctioned by age, or great names. A change, an important change, a
radical change, in this department of education, is imperiously
demanded, and teachers must obey the call, and effect the change. There
is a spirit abroad in the land which will not bow tamely and without
complaint, to the unwarranted dictation of arbitrary, false, and
contradictory rules, merely from respect to age. It demands reason,
consistency and plainness; and yields assent only where they are found.
And teachers, if they will not lead in the reformation, must be
satisfied to follow after; for a reformation is loudly called for, and
will be had. None are satisfied with existing grammars, which, in
principle, are nearly alike. The seventy-three attempts to improve and
simplify Murray, have only acted _intransitively_, and accomplished very
little, if any good, save the employment given to printers, paper
makers, and booksellers.

But I will not enlarge. We have little occasion to wonder at the errors
and mistakes of grammar makers, when our lexicographers tell us for
sober truth, that =to act=, _to be in action_, _not to rest_, to be in
_motion_, to _move_, is _v. n._ a verb neuter, signifying _no action_!!
or _v. i._ verb intransitive, producing _no effects_; and that a
"_neuter verb_ =expresses= (active transitive verb) _a state of being_!!
There are few minds capable of adopting such premises, and drawing
therefrom conclusions which are rational or consistent. Truth is rarely
elicted from error, beauty from deformity, or order from confusion.
While, therefore, we allow the neuter systems to sink into
forgetfulness, as they usually do as soon as we leave school and shut
our books, let us throw the mantle of charity over those who have
thoughtlessly (without _thinking thoughts_) and innocently lead us many
months in dark and doleful wanderings, in paths of error and
contradiction, mistaken for the road to knowledge and usefulness. But
let us resolve to save ourselves and future generations from following
the same unpleasant and unprofitable course, and endeavor to _reflect_
the _light_ which may _shine_ upon our minds, to dispel the surrounding
darkness, and secure the light and knowledge of truth to those who shall
come after us.

Many philologists have undertaken to explain our language by the aid of
foreign tongues. Because there are genitive cases, different kinds of
verbs, six tenses, etc. in the Latin or Greek, the same distinctions
should exist in our grammars. But this argument will not apply,
admitting that other languages will not allow of the plan of exposition
we have adopted, which we very seriously question, tho we have not time
to go into that investigation. We believe that the principles we have
adopted are capable of universal application; that what is action in
England would be action in Greece, Rome, Turkey, and every where else;
that "_like causes will produce like effects_" all the world over. It
matters not by whom the action is seen, it is the same, and all who
gather ideas therefrom will describe it as it appears to them, let them
speak what language they may. But if they have no ideas to express, they
need no language to speak. Monkeys, for aught I know to the contrary,
can speak as well as we; but the reason they do not, is because they
have nothing to say.

Let Maelzael's automaton chess-player be exhibited to a promiscuous
multitude. They would all attempt a description of it, so far as they
were able to gain a knowledge of its construction, each in his own
language. Some might be unable to trace the _cause_, the moving _power_,
thro all the curiously arranged _means_, to the _agent_ who acted as
prime mover to the whole affair. Others, less cautious in their
conclusions, might think it a perpetual motion. Such would find a _first
cause_ short of the Creator, the great original of all things and
actions; and thus violate the soundest principles of philosophy. Heaven
has never left a vacuum where a new and _self_ sustaining power may be
set in operation independent of his ever-present supervision; and hence
the long talked of _perpetual motion_ is the vainest chimera which ever
occupied the human brain. It may well appear as the opposite extreme of
neuter verbs; for, while one would give no action to matter according to
the physical laws which regulate the world, the other would make matter
act of itself, independent of the Almighty. Be it ours to take a more
rational and consistent stand; to view all things and beings as
occupying a place duly prescribed by Infinite Wisdom, _acting_ according
to their several abilities, and subject to the regulation of the
all-pervading laws which guide, preserve, and harmonize the whole.

If there is a subject which teaches us beyond controversy the existence
of a Supreme Power, a Universal Father, an all-wise and ever-present
God, it is found in the order and harmony of all things, produced by the
regulation of Divine laws; and man's superiority to the rest of the
world is most clearly proved, from the possession of a power to adapt
language to the communication of ideas in free and social converse, or
in the transmission of thought, drawn from an observation and knowledge
of things as presented to his understanding.

There is no science so directly important to the growth of intellect
and the future happiness of the child, as the knowledge of language.
Without it, what is life? Wherein would man be elevated above the brute?
And what is language without ideas? A sound without harmony--a shadow
without a substance.

Let language be taught on the principles of true philosophy, as a
science, instead of an arbitrary, mechanical business, a mere art, and
you will no longer hear the complaint of a "_dry_, _cold_, uninteresting
study." Its rules will be simple, plain, and easy; and at every step the
child will increase in the knowledge of more than _words_, in an
acquaintance with principles of natural and moral science. And if there
is any thing that will carry the mind of the child above the low and
grovelling things of earth, and fill the soul with reverence and
devotion to the Holy Being who fills immensity with his presence, it is
when, from observing the laws which govern matter, he passes to observe
the powers and capabilities of the mind, and thence ascends to the
Intellectual Source of _light_, _life_, and _being_, and contemplates
the perennial and ecstatic joys which flow from the presence of Deity;
soul mingling with soul, love absorbed in love, and God all in all.




LECTURE XI.

ON VERBS.

    The verb =to be=.--Compounded of different radical words.--=Am=.
    --Defined.--The name of Deity.--_Ei_.--=Is=.--=Are=.--=Were=,
    =was=.--=Be=.--A dialogue.--Examples.--Passive Verbs examined.--
    Cannot be in the present tense.--The past participle is an
    adjective.


We have gone through the examination of _neuter_ and _intransitive_
verbs, with the exception of the verb =to be=, which we propose to
notice in this place. Much more might be said on the subjects I have
discussed, and many more examples given to illustrate the nature and
operation of actions as expressed by verbs, and also in reference to the
_objects_ of action; but I trust the hints I have given will be
satisfactory. I am confident, if you will allow your minds to _think_
correct _thoughts_, and not _suffer_ them _to be_ misled by erroneous
teaching, you will arrive at the same conclusion that I have, viz. that
all verbs depend on a _common principle_ for their explanation; that
they are alike active, and necessarily take an object after them, either
expressed or understood, in accordance with the immutable law of nature,
which teaches that like causes will produce like effects.

       *       *       *       *       *

The verb =to be=, as it is called, is conjugated by the aid of six
different words, in its various modes and tenses; _am_, _is_, _are_,
_was_, _were_, _be_. _Am_ is unchanged, always in the indicative mood,
present tense, agreeing with the _first_ person singular. _Is_ is also
unchanged, in the same mood and tense, agreeing with the _third_ person
singular. _Art_, in the singular, is the same as _are_ in the plural.
_Was_ and _wast_, are the same as _were_ and _wert_ in meaning, being
derived from the same etymon. _Be_, _being_, and _been_, are changes of
the same word. _Be_ was formerly extensively used in the indicative
present, but in that condition it is nearly obsolete. _Were_ was also
used in the singular as well as plural, especially when coming before
the agent; as, "were I to go, I would do your business." But it is now
more common to have _was_ correctly used in that case. But, as one
extreme often follows another, people have laid _were_ quite too much
aside, and often crowd _was_ into its place in common conversation; as
"we _was_ (were) there yesterday." "There _was_ (were) five or six men
engaged in the business." This error appears to be gaining ground, and
should be checked before it goes farther.

The combination of these different words was produced by habit, to avoid
the monotony which the frequent recurrence of one word, so necessary in
the expression of thought, would occasion: the same as the past tense of
_go_ is made by the substitution of another word radically different,
_went_, the past tense of _wend_ or _wind_. "O'er hills and dales they
_wend_ their way." "The lowing herd _wind_ slowly o'er the lea." _Go_
and _wend_ convey to our minds nearly the same ideas. The latter is a
little more poetical, because less used. But originally their
signification was quite different. So with the parts of the verb =to
be=. They were consolidated as a matter of convenience, and now appear
in their respective positions to express the idea of being, life, or
existence.

I have said this verb expresses the highest degree of action. I will
now attempt to prove it. I should like to go into a labored and critical
examination of the words, and trace their changes thro various
languages, was it in accordance with the design of these lectures. But
as it is not, I shall content myself with general observations.

_I am._

This word is not defined in our dictionaries. It is only said to be
"_the first person of to be_." We must look for its meaning some where
else. It is a compound of two ancient words, _ah_, _breath_, to
_breathe_, life, to _live_, _light_, to _light_; and _ma_, the _hand_,
or to _hand_. It signifies to _vivify_, _sustain_, or _support_ one's
self in being or existence. In process of time, like other things in
this mutable world, its form was changed, but the meaning retained. But
as one person could not _vivify_ or _live_ another, _inflate_ another's
lungs, or breathe another's breath, it became restricted to the first
person. It means, I _breathe breath_, _vivify myself_, _live life_, or
_exercise_ the power of _being_ or _living_. It conveys this fact in
every instance, for no person incapable of breathing can say _I am_. Let
any person pronounce the word _ah-ma_, and they will at once perceive
the appropriateness of the meaning here given. It is very similar to the
letter _h_, and the pronoun, (originally _noun_,) _he_, or the "_rough
breathing_" in the Greek language. _Ma_ is compounded with many words
which express action done by the hand; as, _ma_nufacture, _ma_numit. It
denoted any action or work done by the hand as the instrument; but, like
other words, it gradually changed its import, so as to express any
_effective_ operation. Hence the union of the words was natural and
easy, and _ahma_ denoted _breathing_, _to live_ or sustain life. _H_ is
a precarious letter in all languages that use it, as the pronunciation
of it by many who speak the English language, will prove. It was long
ago dropt, in this word, and after it the last _a_, so that we now have
the plain word _am_.

It was formerly used as a noun in our language, and as such may be found
in Exodus 3: 13, 14. "And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto
the children of Israel and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers
sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his _name_? what
shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I =am= the I AM; and he
said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me
unto you." Chap. 6: 3.--"I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto
Jacob, by the name of God Almighty; but by my name =Jehovah= (I AM) was
I not known unto them." The word _Jehovah_ is the same as _am_. It is
the name of the _self-existent_, _self-sustaining_ =Being=, who has not
only power to uphold all things, but to perform the still more sublime
action of _upholding_ or _sustaining himself_. This is the highest
possible degree of action. Let this fail, and all creation will be a
wreck. He is the _ever-living_, _uncontrolled_, _unfailing_,
_unassisted_, and _never-changing_ God, the Creator, Preserver, Alpha
and Omega, the Beginning and End of all things. He is the _First Cause_
of all causes, the _Agent_, original moving Power, and guiding Wisdom,
which set in motion the wheels of universal nature, and guides and
governs them without "variableness or the shadow of turning."

    "I AM the first, and I, the last,
      Thro endless years the same;
    I AM is my memorial still,
      And my eternal name."
                              _Watts' Hymn._

Ask the Jews the meaning of this _neuter verb_ in their language. They
hold it in the most profound and superstitious reverence. After the
captivity of their nation they never dared pronounce the name except
once a year when the high priest went into the Holy of Holies, and hence
the true pronunciation of it was lost. Unto this day they dare not
attempt to utter it. In all their writings it remains in characters
untranslated. When their Messiah comes they expect he will restore the
pronunciation, and by it they shall be able to accomplish all
things.[15]

According to Plutarch the Greeks had the letters EI, =thou art=,
engraven on the temple of Apollo at Delphi, which is the second person
of =Eimi=, _I am_.[16]

This motto was doubtless borrowed from the Jews, to whom it was given as
the name of the God of Jacob. The same name you may see engraven on
monuments, on pictures of the bible, on masonic implements, and in
various places, untranslated.

Who can suppose that this word "expresses no action," when the very
person incapable of it can not utter it, and no one else can speak it
for him? It denotes the highest conceivable action applied to Deity or
to man, and it is questionable philosophy which dares contradict this
fact. The action expressed by it, is not changed, because it does not
terminate on a foreign object. It remains the same. It is self-action.

_He is._

This word is constructed from an old verb signifying _to stand forth_,
_to appear_, _to show one's self_, and may be traced, I think, to the
latin _eo_, _to go_, and _exist_, to _exeo_, _to go from_; that is, our
_being_ or _existence_, _came_ or _stood forth_ from God. It is
certainly a contraction from the old english _to exist_. _Ist_ is the
spelling still retained in the german and some other languages. It
denotes self-action. One man does not _exist_ another, but himself. He
_keeps himself_ in existence.

_We are_, _thou are-est_, _arst_, or _art_.

Be not surprised when I tell you this is the same word as _air_, for
such is the fact. It signifies to inhale air, to _air ourselves_, or
_breathe air_. "God _breathed_ into man the _breath of life_, and man
became a _living soul_." The new born infant _inhales air_, _inflates
its lungs_ with _air_, and begins to live. We all know how essential
_air_ is to the preservation of life. No animal can live an instant
without it. Drop a squirrel into a receiver from which all _air_ has
been extracted, and it can not live. Even vegetables will die where
there is no air. _Light_ is also indispensable to _life_ and _health_.
_Air_ is _inhaled_ and _exhaled_, and from it life receives support. The
fact being common, it is not so distinctly observed by the careless, as
tho it was more rare. But did you never see the man dying of a
consumption, when the pulmonary or breathing organs were nearly decayed?
How he labors for breath! He asks to have the windows thrown open. At
length he _suffocates_ and dies. Most persons struggle hard for
_breath_ in the hour of dissolving nature. The heaving bosom, the hollow
gasp for _air_, tells us that the lamp of life is soon to be
extinguished, that the hour of their departure has come.

When a person faints, we carry them into the _air_, or blow _air_ upon
them, that nature may be restored to its regular course. In certain
cases physicians find it necessary to force air into the lungs of
infants; they can after that _air_, themselves, _imbibe_ or _drink in
air_, or _inspirit_ themselves with air. But I need not enlarge. Whoever
has been deprived of air and labored hard for breath in a stifled or
unwholesome air, can appreciate what we mean.

_We were_; _he was_.

I have said before that these words are the same, and are used in
certain cases irrespective of number. I have good authority for this
opinion, altho some etymologists give them different derivations.

_Were_, _wert_; _worth_, _werth_; _word_ and _werde_, are derived from
the same etymon and retain a similarity of meaning. They signify
_spirit_, _life_, _energy_. "In the beginning was the _word_, and the
_word_ was with God." "By the _word_ of his grace."

"_They were_," they _inspirited_ themselves, _possessed_ the life,
vitality, or _spirit_, the Creator gave them, and having that spirit,
life, or energy, under proper regulation, in due degree, they were
_worthy_ of the esteem, regard, sympathy, and good _word_ of others.

_To be._

This is considered the root of all the words we have considered, and to
it all others are referred for a definition. Dictionaries give no
definition to _am_, _is_, _are_, _was_, and _were_, all of them as truly
principal verbs as _be_, and possessed of as distinct a meaning. It can
hardly be possible that they should form so important a part of our
language, and yet be incapable of definition. But such is the fact, the
most significant words in our language, and those most frequently used,
are undefined in the books.

Mr. Webster says =to be= signifies, "to exist, to _have_ a real _state_
or _existence_," and so say Walker and Johnson. Now if it is possible to
"=have= _a state of being_ without action or passion," then may this
word express neutrality. But the very definition requires activity, and
an object expressed. It denotes the _act of being_, or living; to
_exercise_ the powers of life, to _maintain_ a position or rank in the
scale of existent things.

The name of the action is _being_, and applies to the Almighty BEING who
_exists_ unchanged as the source of all inferior _beings_ and things,
whose name is _Jehovah_, I AM, the Being of beings, the Fountain of
_light_, _life_, and _wisdom_.

_Be_ is used in the imperative and infinitive moods correctly, by every
body who employs language. "_Be_ here in ten minutes." "_Be it_ far from
thee." "I will _be_ in Boston before noon." If there is any action in
going from Providence to Boston at rail-road speed, in two hours, or
before noon, it is all expressed by the verb _be_, which we are told
expresses _no action_.

The teacher says to his scholars when out at play, "I want you _to be_
in your seats in five minutes." What would they understand him to mean?
that they should stand still? or that they should _change their state of
being_ from play in the yard, to a state of being in their seats? There
is no word to denote such change, except the word _to be_. _Be_ off,
_be_ gone, _be_ here, _be_ there, are commands frequently given and
correctly understood.

The master says to a bright little lad, who has well learned his
grammar, "_Be_ here in a minute."

"Yes, sir, I will _be_ there;" but he does not move.

"_Be_ here immediately."

"Yes, yes, I will _be_ there."

"Don't you understand me? I say, _be_ here instantly."

"Oh, yes, I understand you and will obey."

The good man is enraged. "You scoundrel," says he, "do you mean to
disobey my orders and insult me?"

"Insult you and disobey you; I have done neither," replies the honest
boy.

"Yes you have, and I will chastise you severely for it."

"No, master, I have not; I declare, I have not. I have obeyed you as
well as I know how, to the very letter and spirit of your command."

"Didn't I tell you _to be_ here in a minute, and have not you _remained_
where you were? and didn't you say you would _be_ here?"

"Yes, sir; and did not I do just what you told me to?"

"Why, no, you blockhead; I told you _to be_ here."

"Well, I told you I would _be_ there."

"You _was_ not here."

"Nor did you expect I would _be_, if you have taught me to _speak_,
_write_, and understand correctly."

"What do you mean, you saucy boy?"

"I mean to mind my master, and do what he tells me to."

"Why didn't you do so then?"

"I did."

"You didn't."

"I did."

"You lie, you insult me, you contradict me, you saucy fellow. You are
not fit to be in school. I will punish you severely." And in a passion
he starts for his ferrule, takes the boys hand, and bruises him badly;
the honest little fellow all the while pleading innocence of any
intended wrong.

In a short time they commence _parsing_ this sentence: "It is necessary
_to be_ very particular in ascertaining the meaning of words before we
use them." The master puts _to be_ to the same boy. He says it is an
_active verb_, infinitive mood.

"How is that? an _active_ verb?"

"Yes, sir."

"No, it is not. It is a _neuter_ verb."

"Begging your pardon, master, it is not. It is active."

"Have I got to punish you again so soon, you impudent fellow. You are
not fit to be in school. I will inform your parents of your conduct."

"What have I done that is wrong?"

"You say _to be_ is an _active_ verb, when _I_ tell you, and the
_grammar_ and _dictionary_ tell you, it is _neuter_!"

"What is a _neuter_ verb, master?"

"It expresses 'neither action nor passion, but being or a state of
being.' Have you forgotten it?"

"No, sir, I _thought_ that was the case."

"What did you ask me for then?"

"Because I supposed you had found another meaning for it."

"To what do you allude, you troublesome fellow, you? I'll not bear your
insults much longer."

"For what did you punish me so severely just now?"

"For disobeying my orders."

"What did you order me to do?"

"_To be_ here in a minute."

"Well, did not I do what you told me?"

"No; you kept your seat, and did not come near me."

"Well, I thought and did just what you now tell me; that _to be_ is a
_neuter_ verb, expressing no _action_, but _being_. I had a _state_ of
_being_, and promised to keep it, and did keep it, and you punished me
for doing the very thing you told me to do!!"

The master looked down, shut up his book, and began to say that grammar
is a "_dry_, _cold_, and _useless_" study, hardly worth the trouble of
learning it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_I am_ Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord,
who _is_, and who _was_, and who _is_ to come, the Almighty."--_Rev. 1:
8._

If there is any action in maintaining eternal existence, by which all
things were created and are upheld, it is expressed in the verbs _am_,
_is_, and _was_.

God said, "Let there _be_ light, and there _was_ light;" or more
properly rendered, "Light =be=, and light =was=."

Was there no action in setting the sun, moon and stars in the firmament,
and in causing them to _send_ forth the rays of light to _dispel_ the
surrounding darkness? If there was, _be_ and _was_ denote that action.

"You are commanded =to be= and _appear_ before the court of common
pleas," etc. A heavy penalty is imposed upon those who fail to comply
with this citation--for neglecting to do what is expressed by the
_neuter verb_ to _be_.

Such cases might be multiplied without number, where this verb is
correctly used by all who employ language, and correctly understood by
all who are capable of knowing the meaning of words. But I think you
must all be convinced of the truth of our proposition, that all verbs
express action, either _real_ or _relative_; and in all cases have an
object, expressed or necessarily implied, which stands as the _effect_,
and an agent, as the cause of action: and hence that language, as a
means for the communication of thought, does not deviate from the
soundest principles of philosophy, but in all cases, rightly explained,
serves to illustrate them, in the plainest manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few remarks on the "Passive Verb," and I will conclude this part of
our subject, which has already occupied much more of our attention than
I expected at the outset.

"_A verb passive_ expresses a passion or a suffering, or the receiving
of an action; and necessarily implies an object acted upon, and an agent
by which it is acted upon; as, to be loved; Penelope is loved by me."

In the explanation of this verb, grammarians further tell us that a
passive verb is formed by adding the verb _to be_, which is thus made
auxiliary, to a past participle; as, Portia _was loved_. Pompey _was
conquered_.

It is singular how forgetful our great men sometimes are about observing
their own rules. Take an instance in Mr. Walker's octavo dictionary.
Look for the word _simeter_, a small sword. You will find it spelled
_scimitar_. Then turn over, and you will find it _s_im_i_t_a_r, with the
same definition, and the remark, "more properly _c_im_e_t_a_r." Then
turn back, and find the correct word as he spells it, and there you will
find it cimet_e_r.

Unsettled as to the true spelling, go to our own honored Webster. Look
for "scimiter." He says, see cimit_a_r. Then look for "cimitar;" see
cim_e_t_e_r. Then hunt up the true word, be it _ar_ or _er_, and you
will find it still another way, cim_i_t_e_r. Here the scholar has seven
different ways to spell this word, and neither of his authorities have
followed their own examples. I cite this as one of a thousand instances,
where our savans have laid down rules for others, and disregarded them
themselves.

Portia _is loved_ and _happy_. She is _respectable_, _virtuous_,
_talented_, and _respected_ by all who know her. She _is seated by the
door_. Does the _door_ seat her? What agent, then, causes her _passion_
or _suffering_?

The book is printed. Will you parse _is printed_? It is a passive verb,
indicative mood, _present tense_. Who _is_ printing it? causing it, in
the present tense, to _suffer_ or _receive_ the action? The act of
printing _was performed_ a hundred years ago. How can it be present
time?

Penelope _is loved_ by me. The blow _is received_ by me. It _is given_
by me. Penelope _is seated_ by me. The earthquake _is felt_ by her. The
evils _are suffered_ by her. The thunder _is heard_ by her. Does this
mean that she is the agent, and the earthquake, evils, and thunder, are
the objects which receive the _effects_ which she produces? That would
be singular philosophy, indeed. But _to feel_, _to suffer_, and _to
hear_, are active, and are constructed into passive verbs. Why is it not
as correct to say she _is suffering_ by another's wrongs, _is raging_ by
the operation of passion, or _is travelling_ by rail-road, are passive
verbs? The fact is, our language can not _be explained_ by set rules or
forms of speech. We must regard the sense. The past participle, as it is
called, becomes an adjective by use, and describes her as some way
affected by a previous action. She is _learned_, _handsome_, _modest_,
and, of course, _beloved_ by all who know her.

To say "she _is placed_ by the water's edge," is a passive verb, and
that the water's edge, as the agent, causes her "passion, suffering, or
receiving of the action," is false and ridiculous, for she _placed_
herself there.

"We _are seated_ on our seats by the stove." What power is _now_
operating on us to make us suffer or receive the action of being seated
on our seats? Does the stove perform this action? This is a passive
verb, _present tense_, which requires an "object acted upon, and an
_agent_ by which it is acted upon." But we came in and _seated
ourselves_ here an hour ago.

The man _is acquitted_. He _stands acquitted_ before the public. He _is
learned_, wise, and happy, very much _improved_ within a few years. He
_is_ always active, studious, and _engaged_ in his own affairs. He _is
renowned_, and _valorous_. She _is respected_. She _lives respected_.

If there is such a thing as a passive verb, it can never be used in the
present tense, for the action expressed by the principal verb which is
produced by the agent operating upon the object, is always _past_ tense,
and the auxiliary, or helping verb _to be_, is always present. Let this
verb be analyzed, and the true meaning of each word understood, little
difficulty will be found in giving it an explanation.

I will not spend more time in exposing the futility of this attempted
distinction. It depends solely on a verbal form, but can never _be
explained_ so as _to be understood_ by any scholar. Most grammarians
have seen the fallacy of attempting to give the meaning of this verb.
They can show its _form_, but _are_ frequently _compelled_, as in the
cases above, to sort out the "_passed_ participles" from a host of
adjectives, and it will _be found_ exceeding troublesome to make
scholars perceive any difference in the use of the words, or in the
construction of a sentence. But it may be they have never thought that
duty belonged to them; that they have nothing to do but to show them
what the book says. Suppose they should teach arithmetic on the same
principles, and learn the scholars to set down 144 as the product of 12
times 12. Let them look at the form of the figures, observe just how
they appear, and make some more like them, and thus go thro the book.
What would the child know of arithmetic? Just as much as they do of
grammar, and no more. They would understand nothing of the science of
numbers, of proportion, or addition. They would exercise the power of
imitation, and make one figure look like another. Beyond that, all would
be a _terra incognita_, a land unknown. So in the science of language;
children may learn that the verb _to be_, joined with the past
participle of an active verb, makes _a passive verb_; but what that
passive verb is when made, or how to apply it, especially in the present
tense, they have no means of knowing. Their knowledge is all taken on
trust, and when thrown upon their own resources, they have none on which
to rely.




LECTURE XII.

ON VERBS.

    =Mood=.--Indicative.--Imperative.--Infinitive.--Former distinctions.
    --Subjunctive mood.--=Time=.--Past.--Present.--Future.--The future
    explained.--How formed.--Mr. Murray's distinction of time.--
    Imperfect.--Pluperfect.--Second future.--How many tenses.--
    =Auxiliary Verbs=.--Will.--Shall.--May.--Must.--Can.--Do.--Have.


We are now come to consider the different relations of action in
reference to _manner_ and _time_. We shall endeavor to be as brief as
possible upon this subject, keeping in view meanwhile that candor and
perspicuity which are indispensable in all our attempts to explain new
views.

_Mood_ signifies _manner_. Applied to verbs it explains _how_, in _what
manner_, by what means, under what circumstances, actions are performed.

There are _three_ moods, the _indicative_ or declarative, the
_imperative_ or commanding, and the _infinitive_ or unlimited.

The indicative mood declares an action to be _done_ or _doing_, _not
done_, or _not doing_. It is always in the past or present tense; as,
David _killed_ Goliath; scholars _learn_ knowledge; I _spoke not_ a
word; they _sing not_.

The imperative mood denotes a command given from the first _person_ to
the _second_, _to do_ or _not do_ an action. It expresses the wish or
desire of the first person to have a certain action performed which
depends on the agency of the second. The command is _present_, but the
action signified by the word is _future_ to the giving of the command.
The second person cannot comply with the will of the first till such
will is made known; as, bring me a book; go to the door.

The _infinitive_ mood has no direct personal agent, but is produced as a
necessary consequence, growing out of a certain condition of things. It
is always _future_ to such condition; that is, some prior arrangement
must be had before such consequences will follow. It is always _future_;
as, they are collecting a force _to besiege_ the city. We study grammar
_to acquire_ a knowledge of language. Windows are made _to admit_ light.
The act of besieging the city depends on the previous circumstance, the
collection of a force _to do_ it. Were there no windows, the light would
not be admitted to the room.

These distinctions in regard to action must be obvious to every hearer.
You all are aware of the fact that action necessarily implies an actor,
as every effect must have an efficient cause; and such action clearly or
distinctly _indicated_, must have such an agent to produce it. 2d. You
are acquainted with the fact that one person can express his will to the
second, directing him to do or avoid some thing. 3d. From an established
condition of things, it is easy to deduce a consequence which will
follow, in the nature of things, as an unavoidable result of such a
combination of power, cause, and means.

With these principles you are all familiar, whether you have studied
grammar or not. They are clearly marked, abundantly simple, and must be
obvious to all. They form the only necessary, because the only real,
distinction, in the formation and use of the verb to express action. Any
minor distinctions are only calculated to perplex and embarrass the
learner.

But some grammarians have passed these natural barriers, and built to
themselves schemes to accord with their own vain fancies. The remarks of
Mr. Murray upon this point are very appropos. He says:

"Some writers have given our moods a much greater extent than we have
assigned to them. They assert that the english language may be said,
without any great impropriety, to have as many moods as it has auxiliary
verbs; and they allege, in support of their opinion, that the compound
expression which they help to form, point out those various dispositions
and actions, which, in other languages, are expressed by moods. This
would be to multiply the moods without advantage. It is, however,
certain, that the conjugation or variation of verbs, in the english
language, is effected, almost entirely, by the means of auxiliaries. We
must, therefore, accommodate ourselves to this circumstance; and do that
by their assistance, which has been done in the learned languages (a few
instances to the contrary excepted) in another manner, namely, by
varying the form of the verb itself. At the same time, it is necessary
to set proper bounds to this business, so as not to occasion obscurity
and perplexity, when we mean to be simple and perspicuous. Instead,
therefore, of making a separate mood for every auxiliary verb, and
introducing moods _interrogative_, _optative_, _promissive_,
_hortative_, _precative_, &c., we have exhibited such only as are
obviously distinct; and which, whilst they are calculated to unfold and
display the subject intelligibly to the learner, seem to be sufficient,
and not more than sufficient, to answer all the purposes for which moods
were introduced.

"From grammarians who form their ideas, and make their decisions,
respecting this part of english grammar, on the principles and
constructions of languages which, in these points, do not suit the
peculiar nature of our own, but differ considerably from it, we may
naturally expect grammatical schemes that are not very perspicuous nor
perfectly consistent, and which will tend more to perplex than to inform
the learner."

Had he followed this rule, he would have saved weeks and months to every
student in grammar in the community. But his remarks were aimed at Mr.
Harris, who was by far the most popular writer on language in England at
that time. He has adopted the very rules of Mr. Murray, and carried them
out. By a careful observance of the different forms and changes of the
verb and its auxiliaries, he makes out quite evidently to his own mind,
_fourteen_ moods, which I forbear to name.

Most grammarians contend for _five_ moods, two of which, the _potential_
or powerful, and the _subjunctive_, are predicated on the same
principles as Mr. Harris' optative, interrogative, etc., which they
condemn. It is impossible to explain the character of these moods so as
to be understood. _If_, it is said, is the sign of the subjunctive, and
_may_ and _can_ of the potential; and yet they are often found together;
as, "I will go _if I can_." No scholar can determine in what mood to put
this last verb. It of right belongs to both the potential and
subjunctive. _If_ I _may_ be allowed to speak my mind, I _should_ say
that such distinctions were false.

I will not go into an exposure of these useless and false distinctions,
which are adopted to help carry out erroneous principles. The only
pretence for a subjunctive mood is founded on the fact that _be_ and
_were_ were formerly used in a character different from what they are
at present. _Be_ was used in the indicative mood, present tense, when
doubt or supposition was implied; as, If I _be_ there; if they _be_
wise. _Be_ I a man, and _receive_ such treatment? _Were_ was also used
instead of _was_ in the past tense; as, "_Were_ I an American I would
fight for liberty. If I _were_ to admit the fact." In this character
these words are rapidly becoming obsolete. We now say, "If I _am_ there;
am I a man, and _receive_ such abuses? _was_ I an American; if I was to
admit," etc.

All the round about, perplexing, and tedious affair of conjugating verbs
thro the different modes and tenses will appear in its true character,
when we come to give you a few brief examples, according to truth and
plain sense. But before doing that it will be necessary to make some
remarks on time.

_Tense_ means _time_. We distinguish time according to certain events
which are generally observed. In the use of the verb we express action
in reference to periods of time when it is performed.

There are three tenses, or divisions of time; _past_, _present_, and
_future_.

_Past tense_ applies to actions which are accomplished; as, I _wrote_ a
book; he _recited_ his lesson.

_Present tense_ denotes actions commenced, but not finished, and now in
operation; as, he _reads_ his book; we _sit_ on our seats and _hear_ the
lecture.

_Future tense_ refers to actions, which are _to take_ place hereafter;
as, I am _to go_ from the Institute; we desire _to learn_ grammar
correctly.

Every body can mark three plain distinctions of time, past, present, and
future. With the past we have been acquainted. It has ceased to be. Its
works are ended. The present is a mere line--, nothing as it
were--which is constantly passing unchecked from the past to the future.
It is a mere division of the past and future. The Hebrew, which is
strictly a philosophic language, admits no present; only a _past_ and
_future_. We speak of the present as denoting an action begun and not
finished. In the summer, we say the trees grow, and bear fruit. But when
the fruit is fallen, and the leaves seared by the frost, we change the
expression, and say, it _grew_ and _bore_ fruit.

Of the _future_ we can know nothing definitely. Heaven has hung before
all human eyes an impenetrable veil which obscures all future events. No
man without prophetic vision bestowed by Him who "sees the end from the
beginning," can know what is _to be_, and no expression can be made, no
words employed which will positively declare a future action. We may see
a present condition of things, and from it argue what is _to be_, or
take place hereafter; but all that knowledge is drawn from the past and
deduced from a review of the present relation and tendencies of things.

I hold the paper near the fire and you say it _will_ burn, and you say
truly, for it has a _will_, or what is the same, an inherent tendency
_to burn_. It is made of combustible matter, like paper which we have
seen burn, and hence we argue this has the same tendency to be consumed.
But how does your mind arrive at that fact? If you had never seen a
substance like it burn, why should you conclude this _will_? Does the
child know it _will_ burn? No; for it has not yet learned the quality of
the paper. It is not till the child has been burned that it dreads the
fire. Suppose I take some asbestus, of the kind called amianthus, which
is a mineral, and is formed of slender flexible fibres like flax; and in
eastern countries, especially in Savoy and Corsica, is manufactured into
cloth, paper, and lamp wicks. It was used in making winding sheets for
the dead, in which the bodies were burned, and the ashes, retained in
the incombustible sheet, were gathered into an urn, and revered as the
manes of the dead. Suppose I take some of this incombustible paper or
cloth, and present to you. You say it _will_ burn. Why do you say thus?
Because you have seen other materials which appear like this, consume to
ashes. Let us put it into the fire. It _will not_ burn. It has no
_tendency_ to burn; no quality which will consume. But this is a new
idea to you and hence your mistake. You did not know it _would_ burn,
nor could you _indicate_ such a fact. You only told your opinion derived
from the present appearance of things, and hence you made an assertion
in the _indicative_ mood, present tense, and added to it an _infinitive_
mood, in order to deduce the consequence of this future action--it
_wills_, or has a _tendency_ to burn. But you were mistaken, because
ignorant of the _nature_ of things. This amianthus looks like flax, and
to a person unacquainted with it, appears to be as truly combustible;
but the mineralogist, and all who know its properties, know very well
that it _will_ not--wills nothing, has no inclination, or tendency, to
burn.

Take another example. Here is a steel needle. I hold it before you. You
say, "if I let go of it, it _will_ fall," and you say correctly, for it
has such a tendency. But suppose a magnet, as great as that which is
said to have drawn the iron coffin of Mohammed to the roof of the temple
at Mecca, should be placed in the room above us. The needle, instead of
falling to the floor, would be drawn in the nearest direction to that
magnet. The _will_ or _tendency_ of the needle, as generally understood,
would be overcome, the natural law of gravitation would lose its
influence, by the counteracting power of the loadstone.

I say, "I will go home in an hour." But does that expression _indicate_
the act of _going_? It is placed in the indicative mood in our grammars;
and _go_ is the principal, and _will_ the auxiliary verb. May be I shall
fall and die before I reach my home. But the expression is correct;
_will_ is _present_, go _future_. I _will_, I now _resolve_, am now
inclined _to go_ home.

You see the correctness of our position, that we can not positively
assert a future active in the indicative mood. Try and form to
yourselves a phrase by which it can be done. Should you succeed, you
would violate a law of nature. You would penetrate the dark curtain of
the future, and claim to yourself what you do not possess, a power to
declare future actions. Prophets, by the help of the Almighty, had this
power conferred upon them. But in the revelation of the sublime truths
they were instructed to make known, they were compelled to adopt human
language, and make it agree with our manner of speech.

The only method by which we express a future event, is to make an
assertion in the indicative mood, present tense, and to that append the
natural consequence in the infinitive or unlimited; as, I _am to go_ to
Boston. He is preparing _to visit_ New-York. The infinitive mood is
always future to the circumstance on which it depends.

Mr. Murray says, that "tense, being the distinction of time, might seem
to admit of only the present, past, and future; but to mark it more
_accurately_, it is made to consist of six variations, viz.: the
present, imperfect, perfect, pluperfect, first and second future
tenses." This _more accurate mark_, only serves to expose the author's
folly, and distract the learner's mind. Before, all was plain. The past,
present, and future are distinct, natural divisions, easily understood
by all. But what idea can a person form of an _imperfect_ tense in
action. If there was ever such an action in the world, it was when
_grammarians_ =made= their grammars, which is, if I mistake not,
according to their own authority, in the _im-perfect_ tense! I _wrote_ a
letter. He _read_ his piece well. The scholar learn_ed_ and recit_ed_
his lesson _perfectly_; and yet _learned_, tho made _perfect_ by the
qualification of an _adverb_, is an _imperfect_ action!

But this explains the whole mystery in the business of grammar. We can
here discover the cause of all the troubles and difficulties we have
encountered in the whole affair. When authors _made_ their books, they
_did_ it _imperfectly_; when teachers _taught_ them, it was
_imperfectly_; and when scholars _learned_ them, it was _imperfectly_!!
So at last, we have found the origin of this whole difficulty, in the
grammars themselves; it was all imperfectly done.

But here, again, _mirabile dictu!_ wonderful to tell, we are presented
with a _plu-perfect_ tense; that is,--_plus_ means _more_,--a _more_
than perfect tense! What must that be? If a thing is perfect, we can not
easily conceive any thing beyond. That is a _ne plus ultra_ to all
advancement--there can be no more beyond. If any change is introduced,
it must be by falling from _perfect_ back to _imperfect_.

I _have said_, "many of the distinctions in the grammar books _have
proved_ mischievous; that they are as false as frivolous;" and
this is said _perfectly_, in the perfect tense. If I should say,
"they _had been_ of some benefit," that would be _more_ than
_perfect_--plu-perfect. But when I say, "they _exhibited_ great depth
of research, and _conveyed_ some light on the subject of which they
_treated_," it would all be _im_-perfect.

Next, we are presented with a _second future_ tense, which attempts a
division of time unbounded and unknown. In the greek, they have what is
called a "_paulo post future_," which in plain english, means a "_little
after the future_;" that is, I suppose, when futurity has come to an
end, this tense will commence! At that time we may expect to meet a
"_præter plus quam perfectum_"--a more than perfect tense! But till that
period shall arrive, we see little need of making such false and
unphilosophic distinctions.

A teacher once told me that he explained the distinctions of time to his
scholars from the clock dial which stood in the school room. Suppose
_twelve_ o'clock represents the _present_ tense; _nine_ would signify
the _perfect_; any thing between nine and twelve would be _imperfect_;
any thing beyond, _pluperfect_. On the other hand, any act, forward of
twelve, would be _future_; and at _three_ the _second future_ would
commence. I remarked that I thought this a wonderful improvement,
especially to those who were able to have clocks by which to teach
grammar, but that I could not discover why he did not have _three
future_, as well as _three past_ tenses. Why, he said, there were no
such tenses marked in the books, and hence there was no occasion to
explain them. I asked him why he did not have a tense for every hour,
and so he could distinguish with Mr. Webster, _twelve_ tenses, without
any trouble whatever; and, by going three times round the dial, he could
easily prove the correctness of Dr. Beattie's division; for he says, in
his grammar, there are _thirty-six_ tenses, and thinks there can not be
less without "introducing confusion in the grammatical _art_." But he
thought such a course would serve rather to perplex than enlighten; and
so thought I. But he was the teacher of a popular school in the city
of ----, and had published a duodecimo grammar of over 300 pages,
entitled "Murray's Grammar, _improved_, by ----." I will not give his
name; it would be libellous!

Mr. Murray thinks because certain things which he asserts, but does not
prove, are found in greek and latin, "we may doubtless apply them to the
english verb; and extend the principle _as far as convenience_, and the
idiom of our language require." He found it to his "convenience" to note
_six_ principal, and as many _indefinite_ tenses. Mr. Webster does the
same. Dr. Beattie found it "convenient" to have _thirty-six_. In the
greek they have _nine_. Mr. Bauzee distinguishes in the french _twenty_
tenses; and the royal academy of Spain present a very learned and
elaborate treatise on _seven future tenses_ in that language. The clock
dial of my friend would be found quite "_convenient_" in aiding the
"convenience" of such distinctions.

The fact is, there are only three real divisions of time in any
language, because there are only three in nature, and the ideas of all
nations must agree in this respect. In framing language it was found
impossible to mark any other distinctions, without introducing other
words than those which express simple action. These words became
compounded in process of time, till they are now used as changes of the
same verb. I would here enter into an examination of the formation of
the tenses of greek, latin, french, spanish, and german verbs, did I
conceive it necessary, and show you how, by compounding two words, they
form the various tenses found in the grammars. But it will be more
edifying to you to confine my remarks to our own language. Here it will
be found impossible to distinguish more than three tenses, or find the
verb in any different form, except by the aid of other words, wholly
foreign from those that express the action under consideration.

It is by the aid of auxiliary verbs that the perfect, pluperfect, or
future tenses are formed. But when it is shown you that these are
principal verbs, and like many other words, are used before the
infinitive mood without the word _to_ prefixed to them, you will
perceive the consistency of the plan we propose. That such is the fact
we have abundant evidence to show, and with your consent we will
introduce it in this place. I repeat, all the words long considered
auxiliaries, are _principal_ verbs, declarative of positive action, and
as such are in extensive use in our language. We can hardly agree that
the words _will_, _shall_, _may_, _must_, _can_, _could_, _would_,
_should_, etc. have no meaning, as our grammars and dictionaries would
teach us; for you may look in vain for a definition of them, as
principal verbs, with a few exceptions.

The reason these words are not found in the same relation to other
words, with a _to_ after them, is because they are so often used that we
are accustomed to drop that word. The same may be said of all small
words in frequent use; as, _bid_, _do_, _dare_, _feel_, _hear_, _have_,
_let_, _make_, _see_, and sometimes _needs_, _tell_, and a few others.
Bid him go. I _dare say_ so. I _feel_ it _move_. We _hear_ him _sing_.
_Let_ us _go_. _Make_ him _do_ it. He _must go_ thro Samaria. _Tell_ him
_do_ it immediately.

It is a singular fact, but in keeping with neuter verb systems, that all
the _neuter_ verbs as well as the active, take these auxiliary or
_helping_ verbs, which, according to their showing _help them do
nothing_--"express neither action or passion." A wonderful _help_
indeed!

       *       *       *       *       *

=Will.= This verb signifies to _wish_, to _resolve_, to _exercise
volition_, in reference to a certain thing or action. "I will go." I
_now resolve_ to perform the act of going. When applied to inanimate
things incapable of volition, it signifies what is analogous to it,
_inherent tendency_; as, paper _will_ burn; iron _will_ sink; water
_will_ run. All these things have an inherent or active tendency to
change. Water is composed of minute particles of a round form, piled
together. While on a level they do not move; but let a descent be made,
and these particles, under the influence of gravitation, _will_ change
position, and roll one over another with a rapidity equalled to the
condition in which they are placed. The same may be observed in a
quantity of shot opened at one side which _will_ run thro the aperture;
but the particles being larger, they will not find a level like water.
Grain, sand, and any thing composed of small particles, _will_ exhibit
the same tendency. Iron, lead, or any mineral, in a state of igneous
solution, _will_ run, has the same _inclination_ to run as water, or any
other liquid. In oil, tallow, and lard, when expanded by heat, the same
tendency is observed; but severely chilled with the cold, it congeals,
and _will_ not, has no such _tendency_, to run.

You have doubtless observed a cask filled with water and nearly tight,
(if it is possible, make it quite so,) and when an aperture is made in
the side, it _will_ run but a trifle before it will stop. Open a vent
upon the top of the cask and it _will_ run freely. This _will_ or
tendency was counteracted by other means which I will not stop here to
explain.

This is a most important word in science, physical and moral, and may
be traced thro various languages where it exerts the same influence in
the expression of thought.

"To avoid multiplying of words, I would crave leave here, under the word
_action_, to comprehend the _forbearance_ too of any action proposed;
_sitting still_, or _holding one's peace_, when _walking_ or _speaking_
are proposed, tho mere forbearances, requiring as much the determination
of the _will_, and being as often weighty in their consequences as the
_contrary actions_, may, on that consideration, well enough pass for
actions too. For he that shall turn his thoughts inwards upon what
passes in his mind when he _wills_, shall see that the _will_ or power
of volition is conversant about nothing."--_Locke's Essay_, b. II. c.
21. § 30.

It is correctly applied by writers to _matter_ as well as mind, as may
be seen by consulting their works.

    "Meanwhile as nature _wills_, night bids us rest."
                              _Milton._

The _lupulis_, or common hop, _feels_ for some elevated object which
will assist it in its high aspirations, and _will_ climb it by winding
from left to right, and _will_ not be obliged to go in an opposite
direction; while the _phaseolus_, or kidney bean, takes the opposite
direction. Neither _will_ be compelled to change its course. They _will_
have their own way, and grow as they please, or they _will_ die in the
contest for liberty.

Arsenic has a _tendency_ in itself, a latent power, which only requires
an opportunity suited to its objects, when it _will act_ in the most
efficacious manner. It _will_ destroy the life of the Emperor, who has
_voluntarily_ slain his thousand and tens of thousands. This secret
power does not reside in the flour of wheat, for that _will not_, has no
tendency, to produce such disastrous consequences.

This word is applied in a similar manner to individuals and nations.
The man _will_ fall, not of intention, but of accident. He _will_ kill
himself. The man _will_ drown, and the boat _will_ swim. The water
_will_ hold up the boat, but it _will_ allow the man to sink. The
Russians _will_ conquer the Turks. If conquest depended solely on the
_will_, the Turks would as soon conquer as the Russians. But I have not
time to pursue this topic farther. You can follow out these hints at
your leisure.

=Shall= signifies to be _bound_, _obligated_, or _required_, from
external necessity. Its etymology may be traced back thro various
languages. It is derived direct from the saxon _scaelan_ or _scylan_,
and is found as a principal verb in that language, as well as in ours.
In the church homily they say, "To Him alone we _schall us_ to devote
ourselves;" we _bind_ or _obligate_ ourselves. Chaucer, an early english
poet, says.

    "The faith we _shall_ to God."

Great difficulty has been found in distinguishing between _shall_ and
_will_, and frequent essays have been written, to give arbitrary rules
for their use. If the words were well understood, there could be no
difficulty in employing them correctly. _Will_ signifies _inherent
tendency_, _aptitude_, or _disposition_, and _volition_ in beings
capable of using it. _Shall_ implies _external necessity_, or foreign
obligation. The parent says, "You _will_ suffer misery if you do evil,"
for it is in accordance with the nature of things for evil to produce
misery. "You _shall_ regard my wishes," for you are under _obligation_,
from the relation in which you stand to me, to do so. Let these words be
clearly explained, and there will be no difficulty in using them
correctly.

=May=, past tense _might_. This verb expresses _power_, _strength_, or
_ability_ to perform an action. It is a mistake that it means permission
or liberty only. It implies more than that, the delegation of a power to
perform the contemplated action. Suppose the scholar should faint, would
the teacher say to him you _may_ go into the open air? He has no
_power_, _might_, or _strength_, communicated by such liberty, and must
receive the _might_ or strength of others to carry him out. But to the
scholar in health he says you _may_ go out, thereby giving to him a
power and liberty sufficient to perform the action. This is done on the
same principle that one man gives another a "_power_ of attorney" to
transact his business; and that _power_ constitutes his _liberty_ of
action.

=Must= signifies to be _confined_, _limited_, _bound_, or _restrained_.
I _must_, or am bound, to obey; certain obligations require me to obey.
The adjective of this word is in common use. The air in the cask is
_musty_. It has long been _bound_ or _confined_ there, and prevented
from partaking of the purifying qualities of the atmosphere, and hence
has become _musty_.

=Can.= This word is found as a principal verb and as a noun in our
language, especially in the Scotch dialect. "I _ken_ nae where he'd
gone." Beyond the _ken_ of mortals. Far from all human _ken_. It
signifies to _know_, to perceive, to understand. I knew not where he had
gone. Beyond the knowledge of mortals. Far from all human reach. To
_con_ or _cun_ is a different spelling of the same word. _Cunning_ is
that quick _perception_ of things, which enables a person to use his
knowledge adroitly. The child _can_ read; _knows_ how to read. It _can_
walk. Here it seems to imply _power_; but power, in this case, as in
most others, is gained only by knowledge, for =knowledge is power=.
Many children have strength sufficient to walk, long before they do. The
reason why they _can not_ walk, is, they do not _know how_; they have
not learned to balance themselves in an erect position, so as to move
forward without falling.

A vast proportion of human ability is derived from knowledge. There is
not a being in creation so entirely incapable of self-support, as the
new-born infant; and yet, by the help of knowledge, he becomes the lord
of this lower world. Bonaparte was once as helpless as any other child,
and yet by dint of _can_, _ken_, _cunning_, or knowledge, he made all
Europe tremble. But his knowledge was limited. He became blind to
danger, bewildered by success, and he _could_ no longer follow the
prudent course of wisdom, but fell a sacrifice to his own unbridled
ambition, and blinded folly. An enlightened people _can_ govern
themselves; but _power_ of government is gained by a knowledge of the
principles of equality, and mutual help and dependency; and whenever the
people become ignorant of that fact, they _will_ fall, the degraded
victims of their own folly, and the wily influence of some more knowing
aspirant for power.

This is a most important topic; but I dare not pursue it farther, lest I
weary your patience. A few examples _must_ suffice.

    "Jason, she cried, for aught I _see_ or _can_,
    This deed," &c.
                              _Chaucer._

                          A famous man,
    Of every _witte_ somewhat he _can_,
    _Out take_ that him lacketh rule,
    His own estate to guide and rule.
                              _Gower._

=Do= has been called a _helping_ verb; but it needs little observation
to discover that it is no more so than a hundred other words. "_Do_
thy diligence to come before winter." "_Do_ the work of an
evangelist."--_Paul to Timothy._ I _do_ all in my power _to expose_ the
error and wickedness of false teaching. _Do_ afford relief. _Do_
something to afford relief.

=Have= has also been reckoned as an auxiliary by the "helping verb
grammars," which has no other duty to perform than help conjugate other
verbs thro some of their moods and tenses. It is a word in very common
use, and of course must possess a very important character, which should
be carefully examined and distinctly known by all who desire a knowledge
of the construction of our language.

The principal difficulty in the explanation of this word, is the
peculiar meaning which some have attached to it. It has been defined to
denote _possession_ merely. But when we say, a man _has_ much _property
destroyed_ by fire, we do not mean that he _gains_ or _possesses_ much
property by the fire; nor can we make _has_ auxiliary to _destroyed_,
for in that case it would stand thus: a man _has destroyed_ much
property by fire, which would be false, for the destruction was produced
by an incendiary, or some other means wholly unknown to him.

You at once perceive that _to possess_ is not the only meaning which
attaches to _have_. It assumes a more important rank. It can be traced,
with little change in form, back thro many generations. It is the same
word as _heave_, originally, and retains nearly the same meaning. Saxon
_habban_, Gothic _haban_, German _haben_, Latin _habeo_, French _avoir_,
are all the same word, varied in spelling more than in sound; for _b_ in
many languages is sounded very much like _v_, or _bv_. It may mean to
_hold_, _possess_, _retain_, _sway_, _control_, _dispose of_, either as
a direct or _relative_ action; for a man sustains relations to his
actors, duties, family, friends, enemies, and all the world, as well as
to his possessions. He _has_ a hard task to perform. He _has_ much pain
_to suffer_. He _has_ suffered much unhappiness.

I _have written_ a letter. I _have_ a written letter. I _have_ a letter
_written_. These expressions differ very little in meaning, but the verb
_have_ is the same in each case. By the first expression, I signify that
I have _caused_ the letter to be _written_; by the second that I have a
letter on which such action has been performed; and by the third, that
such written letter stands in such relation to myself.

I _have written_ a letter and sent it away. _Written_ is the past
participle from _write_; as an adjective it describes the letter in the
condition I placed it; so that it will be defined, wherever it is found,
as my letter; that is, some way _related_ to me.

We can here account for the old _perfect tense_, which is said, "not
only to refer to what is _past_, but also _to convey an allusion to the
present time_." The verb is in the _present_ tense, the participle is in
the _past_, and hence the reason of this allusion. I _have_ no _space
allowed_ me to go into a full investigation of this word, in its
application to the expression of ideas. But it is necessary to _have_ it
well _understood_, as it _has_ an important _service entrusted_ to it;
and I hope you will _have_ clear _views presented_ to your minds, strong
enough to _have_ former _errors eradicated_ therefrom.

If you _have_ leisure _granted_, and patience and disposition equal-_ed_
to the task, you have my consent to go back and read this sentence over
again. You will find it _has_ in it embodied much important information
in relation to the use of _have_ and the perfect tense.




LECTURE XIII.

ON VERBS.

    Person and number in the agent, not in the action.--Similarity of
    agents, actions, and objects.--Verbs made from nouns.--Irregular
    verbs.--Some examples.--Regular Verbs.--_Ed_.--_Ing_.--Conjugation
    of verbs.--To love.--To have.--To be.--The indicative mood
    varied.--A whole sentence may be agent or object.--Imperative
    mood.--Infinitive mood.--Is always future.


I have said before that action can never be known separate from the
actor; that the verb applies to the agent in an _acting_ condition, as
that term has been defined and should be understood. Hence Person and
Number can never attach to the verb, but to the agent with which, of
course, the action must, in every respect, agree; as, "_I write_." In
this case the action corresponds with myself. But to say that _write_ is
in the "first person, singular number," would be wrong, for no such
number or person belongs to the verb, but is confined to myself as the
agent of the action.

The form of the verb is changed when it agrees with the second or third
person singular; more on account of habit, I apprehend, than from any
reason, or propriety as to a change of meaning in the word. We say, when
using the regular _second_ person singular, "_thou writest_," a form
rarely observed except in addresses to Deity, or on solemn occasions. In
the _third_ person, an _s_ is added to the regular form; as, "_he
writes_." The old form, which was in general use at the time the common
version of the Bible was published, was still different, ending in
_eth_; as, _he thinketh_, _he writeth_. This style, altho considerably
used in the last century, is nearly obsolete. When the verb agrees with
the plural number it is usually the same as when it agrees with the
first person; as, "_We write_, _you write_, _they write_." There are few
exceptions to these rules.

Some people have been very tenacious about retaining the old forms of
words, and our books were long printed without alteration; but change
will break thro every barrier, and book-makers must keep pace with the
times, and put on the dress that is catered for them by the public
taste; bearing in mind, meanwhile, that great and practical truths are
more essential than the garb in which they appear. We should be more
careful of our health of body and purity of morals than of the costume
we put on. Many genteel coats wrap up corrupt hearts, and fine hats
cover silly heads. What is the chaff to the wheat?

Even our good friends, the quakers, who have particularly labored to
retain old forms--"the plain language,"--have failed in their attempt,
and have substituted the _object_ form of the pronoun for the _agent_,
and say, "_thee thinks_," for _thou thinkest_. Their mistake is even
greater than the substitution of _you_ for _thou_.

So far as language depends on the conventional regulation of those who
use it, it will be constantly changing; new words will be introduced,
and the spelling of old ones altered, so as to agree with modern
pronounciation. We have all lived long enough to witness the truth of
this remark. The only rule we can give in relation to this matter is, to
follow our own judgments, aided by our best writers and speakers.

The words which express action, are in many cases very similar to the
agents which produce them; and the objects which are the direct results
produced by such action, do not differ very materially. I will give you
a few examples.

    _Agent._           _Verb._        _Object._
    Actors             Act            Actions
    Breathers          Breathe        Breath
    Builders           Build          Buildings
    Coiners            Coin           Coins
    Casters            Cast           Casts or castings
    Drinkers           Drink          Drink
    Dreamers           Dream          Dreams
    Earners            Earn           Earnings
    Fishers            Fish           Fishes
    Gainers            Gain           Gain
    Hewers             Hew            Hewings
    Innkeepers         Keep           Inns
    Light or lighters  Light or shed  Lights
    Miners             Mine or dig    Mines
    Pleaders           Plead or make  Pleas
    Producers          Produce        Products
    Raisers            Raise          Raisings or houses
    Runners or racers  Run            Runs or races
    Sufferers          Suffer         Sufferings
    Speakers           Speak          Speeches
    Thinkers           Think          Thoughts
    Writers            Write          Writings
    Workers            Work           Works

I give you these examples to show you the near alliance between
_actors_, (  ,) and _actions_; or agents, _actions_, and objects. Such
expressions as the above are inelegant, because they are uncommon; but
for no other reason, for we, in numberless cases, employ the same word
for agent and verb; as, _painters paint_ buildings, and _artists_ paint
paintings; _bookbinders bind books_; _printers print_ books, and other
_prints_. A little observation will enable you to carry out these hints,
and profit by them. You have observed the disposition in children, and
foreigners, who are partially acquainted with our language, to make
verbs out of almost every noun, which appears to us very aukward; but
was it common, it would be just as correct as the verbs now used. There
are very few verbs which have not a noun to correspond with them, for we
make verbs, that is, we use words to express action, which are nearly
allied to the agent with which such action agrees.[17] From botany we
have made _botanize_; from Mr. McAdam, the inventor of a particular
kind of road, _macadamize_, which means to make roads as he made them.
Words are formed in this way very frequently. The word _church_ is often
used as a noun to express a building used for public worship; for the
services performed in it; for the whole congregation; for a portion of
believers associated together; for the Episcopal order, etc. It is also
used as a verb. Mr. Webster defines it, "To perform with any one the
office of returning thanks in the church after any signal deliverance."
But the word has taken quite a different turn of late. _To church_ a
person, instead of receiving him into communion, as that term would seem
to imply, signifies to deal with an offending member, to excommunicate,
or turn him out.

But I will not pursue this point any farther. The brief hints I have
thrown out, will enable you to discover how the meaning and forms of
words are changed from their original application to suit the notions
and improvements of after ages. A field is here presented which needs
cultivation. The young should be taught to search for the etymology of
words, to trace their changes and meaning as used at different times and
by different people, keeping their minds constantly directed to the
object signified by such verbal sign. This is the business of
philosophy, under whatever name it may be taught; for grammar, rhetoric,
logic, and the science of the mind, are intimately blended, and should
always be taught in connexion. We have already seen that words without
meaning are like shadows without realities. And persons can not employ
language "correctly," or "with propriety," till they have acquainted
themselves with the import of such language--the ideas of things
signified by it. Let this course be adopted in the education of
children, and they will not be required to spend months and years in the
study of an "_art_" which they can not comprehend, for the simple reason
that they can not apply it in practice. Grammar has been taught as a
mere _art_, depending on arbitrary rules to be mechanically learned,
rather than a science involving the soundest and plainest principles of
philosophy, which are to be known only as developed in common practice
among men, and in accordance with the permanent laws which govern human
thought.

Verbs differ in the manner of forming their _past_ tenses, and
participles, or adjectives. Those ending in _ed_ are called _regular_;
those which take any other termination are _irregular_. There are about
two hundred of the latter in our language, which differ in various ways.
Some of them have the _past_ tense and the past participle the same; as,

    Bid               Bid                 Bid
    Knit              Knit                Knit
    Shut              Shut                Shut
    Let               Let                 Let
    Spread            Spread              Spread, etc.

Others have the past tense and participle alike, but different from the
present; as,

    Lend              Lent                Lent
    Send              Sent                Sent
    Bend              Bent                Bent
    Wend              Went                Went
    Build             Built or builded    Built
    Think             Thought             Thought, etc.

Some have the present and past tense and participle different; as,

    Blow              Blew                Blown
    Grow              Grew                Grown
    Begin             Began               Begun
    See               Saw                 Seen
    Write             Wrote               Written
    Give              Gave                Given
    Speak             Spoke               Spoken
    Rise              Rose                Risen
    Fall              Fell                Fallen, etc.

There are a few which are made up of different radicals, which have been
wedded together by habit, to avoid the frequent and unpleasant
recurrence of the same word; as,

    Am                Was                 Been
    Go (wend)         Went                Gone, etc.

Some which were formerly irregular, are now generally used with the
regular termination, in either the past tense or participle, or both;
as,

    Hang              Hung or hanged      Hung or hanged
    Dare              Dared or durst      Dared
    Clothe            Clad or clothed     Clad or clothed
    Work              Worked or wrought   Worked
    Shine             Shined or shone     Shone or shined
    Spill             Spilled or spilt    Spilt or spilled, etc.

The syllable _ed_ is a contraction of the past tense of _do_; as, I
_loved_, love _did_, _did_ love, or love-_ed_. He learn_ed_, learn did,
did learn, or learned. It signifies action, _did_, done, or
accomplished. You have all lived long enough to have noticed the change
in the pronounciation of this syllable. Old people sound it full and
distinct; and so do most others in reading the scriptures; but not so
generally as in former times. In poetry it was usually abbreviated so as
to avoid the full sound; and hence we may account for the _irregular_
termination of many words, such as _heard_, for _heared_; _past_, for
_passed_; _learnt_, for _learned_; _built_, for _builded_. In modern
poetry, however, the _e_ is retained, tho sounded no more than formerly.

_Ing_ is derived from the verb to _be_, and signifies _being_,
_existing_; and, attached to a verb, is used as a noun, or adjective,
retaining so much of its former character as to have an object after it
which is affected by it; as, "I am _writing_ a lecture." Here _writing_,
the present participle of _write_, describes myself in my present
employment, and yet retains its action as a verb, and terminates on
_lecture_ as the thing written. "The man was taken in the act of
_stealing_ some money." In this case _stealing_ names the action which
the man was performing when detected, which action thus named, has
_money_ for the object on which it terminates.

I barely allude to this subject in this place to give you an idea of the
method we adopt to explain the meaning and use of participles. It
deserves more attention, perhaps, to make it plain to your minds; but as
it is not an essential feature in the new system, I shall leave it for
consideration in a future work. Whoever is acquainted with the formation
of the present participle in other languages, can carry out the
suggestions I have made, and fully comprehend my meaning.

I will present you with an example of the conjugations of a few verbs
which you are requested to compare with the "_might could would should
have been loved_" systems, which you were required to learn in former
times. You will find the verb in every _form_ or position in which it
ever occurs in our language, written or spoken.

Conjugation of the regular verb =to love=.


    INDICATIVE MOOD.

                      _Singular_               _Plural_

                      I _love_                 We _love_
    Present tense     Thou _lovest_            You _love_
                      He, she, or it _loves_   They _love_

                      I _loved_                We _loved_
    Past tense        Thou _lovedst_           You _loved_
                      He, she, or it _loved_   They _loved_


    IMPERATIVE MOOD.

    _Love._


    INFINITIVE MOOD.

    _To love._

    PARTICIPLES.

    Present, _Loving_
    Past, _Loved_

The irregular verb =to have=, is thus conjugated.


    INDICATIVE MOOD.

                      I _have_                 We _have_
    Present tense     Thou _hast_              You _have_
                      He _has_                 They _have_

                      I _had_                  We _had_
    Past tense        Thou _hadst_             You _had_
                      He _had_                 They _had_


    IMPERATIVE MOOD.

    _Have._


    INFINITIVE MOOD.

    _To have._

    PARTICIPLES.

    Present, _Having_
    Past, _Had_

The irregular verb =to be=, stands thus:


    INDICATIVE MOOD.

                      I _am_                   We _are_
    Present tense     Thou _art_               You _are_
                      He _is_                  They _are_

                      I _was_                  We _were_
    Past tense        Thou _wast_              You _were_
                      He _was_                 They _were_


    IMPERATIVE MOOD.

    _Be._


    INFINITIVE MOOD.

    _To be._

    PARTICIPLES.

    Present, _Being_
    Past, _Been_

These examples will suffice to give you an idea of the ease and
simplicity of the construction of verbs, and by a comparison with old
systems, you can, for yourselves, determine the superiority of the
principles we advocate. The above tabular views present every form which
the verb assumes, and every position in which it is found. In use,
these words are frequently compounded together;[18] but with a
knowledge of the above principles, and the _meaning_ of the words--a
most essential consideration--you will always be able to analyze any
sentence, and parse it correctly. I have not time to enlarge on this
point, to show how words are connected together. Nor do I think it
necessary to enable you to understand my views. To children such a work
would be indispensable, and shall be attended to if we are able to
publish a grammar containing the simple principles of language.

       *       *       *       *       *

The indicative mood is varied four ways. 1st, affirmatively, _he
writes_; 2d, negatively, _he writes not_; 3d, interrogatively, _does_ he
write? or _writes_ he? 4th, suppositively, if _he writes_, _suppose he
writes_, allow _he writes_.

The _first_ is a simple affirmation of a fact, and is easily understood.
The _second_ is formed by annexing a term to express negation. _Not_ is
a contraction from _nought_ or _naught_, which is a compound of _ne_,
negative, and ought or aught, _ne-aught_, meaning _no-thing_. _He writes
not_; he writes nothing. He does _not_ write; he does _nothing_ to
write. _Neither_ is a compound of _ne_ and _either_, _not either_. He
_can not_ read; he _can_, _kens_, _knows nothing_, has no ability _to
read_.

The third is constructed into a question by placing the verb before the
agent, or by prefixing another word before the agent, and then placing
the former verb as an infinitive after it; as, _Does_ he write? or
_writes_ he? When another verb is prefixed, one is always chosen which
will best decide the query. Does he _any thing_ to write? Does he make
any motions or show any indications to write? When the _will_ or
disposition of a person is concerned, we choose a word accordingly.
_Will_ he write? Has he the _will_ or disposition to write? _Can_ he
write? Is he able--_knows_ he how to write? A little observation will
enable you to understand my meaning.

In the fourth place, a supposition is made in the imperative mood, in
accordance with which the action is performed. "_If_ ye _love_ me, keep
my commandments." _Give_, _grant_, _allow_, _suppose_ this fact--you
_love_ me, keep my commandments. I will go if I can. I _resolve_,
_will_, or _determine_ to go; _if_, _gif_, _give_, grant, allow this
fact, I _can_, _ken_, _know_ how, or _am_ able _to go_. But more on this
point when we come to the consideration of contractions.

In this mood the verb must have an agent and object, expressed or
implied; as, "_farmers_ cultivate the _soil_." But a whole sentence,
that is, an idea written out, may perform this duty; as, "The study of
grammar, on false principles, is productive of no good." What is
productive of no good? What is the agent of _is_? "The _study_," our
books and teachers tell us. But does such a construction give the true
meaning of the sentence? I think not, for _study_ is indispensable to
knowledge and usefulness, and _the study_ of grammar, properly directed,
is a most useful branch of literature, which should never be dispensed
with. It is the study of grammar _on false principles_, which _is
productive of no good_. You discover my meaning, and will not question
its correctness. You must also see how erroneous it would be to teach
children that "_to study_ is productive of no good." The force of the
sentence rests on the "false principles" taught. Hence the whole
statement is truly the agent of the verb.

The object on which the action terminates is frequently expressed in a
similar manner; as, "He wrote to me, that he will adopt the new system
of grammar, if he can procure some books to give his scholars to learn."
Will you parse _wrote_? Most grammarians will call it an _intransitive_
verb, and make out that "he wrote" _nothing_ to me, because there is no
regular objective word after it. Will you parse _that_? It is a
"conjunction _copulative_." What does it connect? "_He wrote_" to the
following sentence, according to Rule 18 of Mr. Murray; "conjunctions
connect the _same_ moods and tenses of verbs and cases of nouns and
pronouns." Unluckily you have two different tenses connected in this
case. Will you parse _if_? It is a _copulative_ conjunction, connecting
the two members of the sentence--_he will adopt_ if _he can procure_:
Rule, as above. How exceeding unfortunate! You have _two_ different
moods, and too different tenses, connected by a _copulative_ conjunction
which the rule says "connects _the same_ moods and tenses! What
nonsense! What a falsehood! What a fine thing to be a grammarian! And
yet, I venture the opinion, and I judge from what I have seen in myself
and others, there is not one teacher in a hundred who will not learn
children to parse as above, and apply the same rule to it. "I _will go_
if I _can_." "I _do_ and _will_ contend." "As it _was_ in the beginning,
_is_ now, _and_ ever _shall be_." "I _am_ here and _must_ remain." "He
_will do_ your business _if_ he _has_ time." "I _am_ resolved _to
expose_ the errors of grammar, _and will do_ it thoroly _if_ I _can_."

In these examples you have different moods and tenses, indiscriminately,
yet correctly coupled together, despite the rules of syntax which teach
us to explain language "with propriety."

_That_, in the sentence before us, is an adjective, referring to the
following sentence, which is the _object_ of _wrote_, or is the thing
written. "He wrote to me _that_" fact, sentiment, opinion,
determination, or resolution, that writing, letter, or word--"he will
adopt the new system of grammar, if he can procure some books."

This subject properly belongs to that department of language called
syntax; but as I shall not be able to treat of that in this course of
lectures, I throw in here these brief remarks to give you some general
ideas of the arrangement of words into sentences, according to their
true meaning, as obtained from a knowledge of their etymology. You
cannot fail to observe this method of constructing language if you will
pay a little attention to it when reading; keeping all the time in view
the fact that words are only the signs of ideas, derived from an
observation of things. You all know that it is not merely the steam that
propels the boat, but that it is steam _applied to machinery_. Steam is
the more latent cause; and the engine with its complicated parts is the
direct means. In the absence of either, the boat would not be propelled.
In the formation of language, I may say correctly, "Solomon _built_ the
temple;" for he stood in that relation to the matter which supposes it
would not have been built without his direction and command. To
accomplish such an action, however, he need not raise a hammer or a
gavel, or draw a line on the trestle board. His command made known to
his ministers was sufficient to _cause_ the work to be done. Hence the
whole fact is _indicated_ or declared by the single expression, "Solomon
_built_ the temple."

The Imperative mood is unchanged in form. I can say to one man, _go_, or
to a thousand, _go_. The commander when drilling _one_ soldier, says,
_march_; and he bids the whole battalion, _march_. The agent who is _to
perform_ the action is understood when not expressed; as, _go_, _go
thou_, or _go you_. The agent is generally omitted, because the address
is given direct to the person who is expected to obey the instruction,
request, or command. This verb always agrees with an agent in the
_second_ person. And yet our "grammars made easy" have given us _three
persons_ in this mood--"_Let me love_; _love_, _love thou_, or _do_ thou
_love_; let him love." In the name of common sense, I ask, what can
children learn by such instruction? "_Let me love_," in the conjugation
of the verb _to love_! To whom is this command given? To _myself_ of
course! I command myself to "_let me love_!" What nonsense! "Let _him_
love." I stand here, you set there, and the _third_ person is in
Philadelphia. I utter these words, "Let _him love_." What is my meaning?
Why, our books tell us, that the verb to _love_ is _third_ person. Then
I command _him_ to _let himself love_! What jargon and falsehood! You
all know that we can address the _second_ person only. You would call me
insane if I should employ language according to the rules of grammar as
laid down in the standard books. In my room alone, no person near me, I
cry out, "_let me be quiet_"--imperative mood, first person of _to be_!
Do I command myself to _let_ myself _be_ quiet? Most certainly, if _be_
is the principal verb in the first person, and _let_ the auxiliary. The
teacher observes one of his pupils take a pencil from a classmate who
sets near him. He says, "_let him have it_." To whom is the command
given? It is the imperative mood, third person of the verb _to have_.
Does he command the third person, the boy who _has_ not the pencil? Such
is the resolution of the sentence, according to the authority of
standard grammars. But where is there a child five years old who does
not know better. Every body knows that he addresses the second person,
the boy who has the pencil, to _let_ the other _have_ it.

Teachers have learned their scholars the _first_ and _third_ persons of
this mood when committing the conjugation of verbs; but not one in ten
thousand ever adopted them in parsing. "_Let me love._" _Let_, all
parse, Mr. Murray not excepted, in the _second_ person, and _love_ in
the infinitive mood after it, without the sign _to_; according to the
rule, that "verbs which follow _bid_, _dare_, _feel_, _hear_, _let_,
_needs_, _speak_," etc. are in the infinitive mood. It is strange people
will not eat their own cooking.

There can be no trouble in understanding this mood, as we have explained
it, always in the future tense, that is, future to the command or
request, agreeing with the _second_ person, and never varied on account
of number.

The only variation in the infinitive mood is the omission of _to_ in
certain cases, which is considered as a part of the verb; tho in truth
it is no more so than when used in the character of an old fashioned
preposition. In certain cases, as we have before observed, it is not
expressed. This is when the infinitive verb follows small words in
frequent use; as, shall, will, let, can, must, may, bid, do, have, make,
feel, hear, etc.

This mood is always in the future tense; that is, it is future to the
circumstances or condition of things upon which it depends; as, they are
making preparations _to raise_ the building. Here _to raise_ is future
to the preparations, for if they make no preparations, the buildings
will not be raised. The boy studies his book _to learn_ his lesson. If
he does not study, he will not be likely _to learn_ his lesson.

The allied powers of Europe combined their forces _to defeat_ Napoleon.
In this instance the whole expression is in the past tense;
nevertheless, the action expressed in the infinitive mood, _was future_
to the circumstance on which it depended; that is, the _defeat_ was
_future_ to the _combination_ of the forces. Abraham raised the knife
_to slay_ his son. Not that he did _slay_ him, as that sentence must be
explained on the common systems, which teach us that _to slay_ is in the
_present tense_; but he raised the fatal knife for that purpose, the
fulfilment of which was future; but the angel staid his hand, and
averted the blow. The patriots of Poland _made_ a noble attempt _to
gain_ their liberty. But they did not _gain it_, as our grammars would
teach us. _To gain_ was future to the attempt, and failed because the
circumstances _indicated_ by the event, were insufficient to produce so
favorable a result.

No person of common discernment can fail to observe the absolute
falsehood of existing systems in respect to this mood. It is used by our
authors of grammar in the _present_ and _past_ tenses, but never in the
_future_. Let us give a moment to the consideration of this matter. Take
the following example. He _will prepare_ himself next week _to go_ to
Europe. Let the school master parse _will prepare_. It is a verb,
indicative mood, _first future_ tense. _Next week_ is the point in
futurity when the _preparation_ will be _made_. Now parse _to go_. It
is a verb, infinitive mood, _present tense_! Then _he_ is already on his
way to Europe, when he is not _to prepare_ himself till next week! An
army is collected _to fight_ the enemy. Is the fight already commenced?
_To fight_ is present tense, say the books. We shall study grammar next
year, _to obtain_ a knowledge of the principles and use of language. Is
_to obtain_ present tense? If so there is little need of spending time
and money to study for a knowledge we _already possess_.

    "Hope springs eternal in the human breast;
    Man never _is_, but always =to be= blest."
                              _Pope._

"Who _was_, and who _is_, and who _is_ =to come=."--_Bible._ It is not
that a man thinks himself already in possession of a sufficiency, but
hopes =to be= qualified, etc.

I _am to go_ in an hour. He _is to go_ to-morrow. I _am_ ready _to hear_
you recite your lesson. He _has been waiting_ a long time _to see_ if
some new principles will not be introduced. He is prepared _to appear_
before you whenever you shall direct. We _are_ resolved _to employ_
neuter verbs, potential and subjunctive moods, im-perfect, plu-perfect,
and second future tenses, no longer. False grammars _are_ only fit-_ted
to be_ laid aside. We are in duty bound _to regard_ and _adopt_ truth,
and _reject_ error; and we _are_ determined _to do_ it in grammar, and
every thing else.

We are not surprised that people cannot comprehend grammar, as usually
taught, for it is exceedingly difficult to make error appear like truth,
or false teaching like sound sentiment. But I will not stop to moralize.
The hints I have given must suffice.

Much more might be said upon the character and use of verbs; but as
these lectures are not designed for _a system_ of grammar _to be
taught_, but to expose the errors of existing systems, and prepare the
way for a more rational and consistent exposition of language, I shall
leave this department of our subject, presuming you will be able to
comprehend our views, and appreciate their importance. We have been
somewhat critical in a part of our remarks, and more brief than we
should have been, had we not found that we were claiming too much of the
time of the Institute, which is designed as a means of improvement on
general subjects. Enough has been said, I am sure, to convince you, if
you were not convinced before, why the study of grammar is so intricate
and tedious, that it is to be accounted for from the fact that the
theories by which it is taught are false in principle, and can not be
adopted in practice; and that something ought to be done to make the
study of language easy, interesting, and practical. Such a work is here
attempted; but it remains with the public to say whether these plain
philosophical principles shall be sustained, matured, perfected, and
adopted in schools, or the old roundabout course of useless and
ineffectual teaching be still preserved.




LECTURE XIV.

ON CONTRACTIONS.

    A temporary expedient.--Words not understood.--All words must have
    a meaning.--Their formation.--Changes of meaning and form.--Should
    be observed.--=Adverbs=.--Ending in _ly_.--Examples.--Ago.--Astray.
    --Awake.--Asleep.--Then, when.--There, where, here.--While,
    till.--Whether, together.--Ever, never, whenever, etc.--Oft.--Hence.
    --Perhaps.--Not.--Or.--Nor.--Than.--As.--So.--Distinctions
    false.--Rule 18.--If.--But.--Tho.--Yet.


We have concluded our remarks on the necessary divisions of words.
Things _named_, _defined_ and _described_, and their _actions_,
_relations_, and _tendencies_, have been considered under the classes of
Nouns, Adjectives, and Verbs. To these classes all words belong when
properly explained; a fact we desire you to bear constantly in mind in
all your attempts to understand and employ language. But there are many
words in our language as well as most others, which are so altered and
disguised that their meaning is not easily comprehended. Of course they
are difficult of explanation. These words we have classed under the head
of _Contractions_, a term better calculated than any other we have seen
adopted to express their character. We do not however lay any stress on
the appropriateness of this appellation, but adopt it as a temporary
expedient, till these words shall be better understood. They will then
be ranked in their proper places among the classes already noticed.

Under this head may be considered the words usually known as "adverbs,
conjunctions, prepositions, and interjections." That the etymology and
meaning of these words have not been generally understood will be
conceded, I presume, on all hands. In our opinion, that is the only
reason why they have been considered under these different heads, for in
numberless cases there is nothing in their import to correspond with
such distinctions. Why "an adverb expresses some _quality_ or
circumstance respecting a verb, adjective, or other adverb;" why "a
conjunction is chiefly used to connect sentences, so as out of _two_ to
make only _one_ sentence;" or why "prepositions serve to connect words
with one another, and show the relation between them," has never been
explained. They have been _passed over_ with little difficulty by
teachers, having been furnished with lists of words in each "part of
speech," which they require their pupils to commit to memory, and "for
ever after hold their peace" concerning them. But that these words have
been defined or explained in a way to be understood will not be
pretended. In justification of such ignorance, it is contended that such
explanation is not essential to their proper and elegant use. If such is
the fact, we may easily account for the incorrect use of language, and
exonerate children from the labor of studying etymology.

But these words have meaning, and sustain a most important rank in the
expression of ideas. They are, generally, abbreviated, compounded, and
so disguised that their origin and formation are not generally known.
Horne Tooke calls them "the _wheels_ of language, the _wings_ of
Mercury." He says "tho we might be dragged along without them, it would
be with much difficulty, very heavily and tediously." But when he
undertakes to show that they were _constructed_ for this object, he
mistakes their true character; for they were not invented for that
purpose, but were originally employed as nouns or verbs, from which they
have been corrupted by use. And he seems to admit this fact when he
says,[19] "_abbreviation_ and _corruption_ are always busiest with the
words which are most frequently in use. Letters, like soldiers, being
very apt to desert and drop off in a long march, and especially if their
passage happens to lie near the confines of an enemy's country."

In the original construction of language a set of literary men did not
get together and manufacture a lot of words, finished thro out and
exactly adapted to the expression of thought. Had that been the case,
language would doubtless have appeared in a much more regular, stiff,
and formal dress, and been deprived of many of its beautiful and lofty
figures, its richest and boldest expressions. Necessity is the mother of
invention. It was not until people had _ideas_ to communicate, that they
sought a medium for the transmission of thought from one to another; and
then such sounds and signs were adopted as would best answer their
purpose. But language was not then framed like a cotton mill, every part
completed before it was set in operation. Single expressions,
_sign_-ificant of things, or _ideas_ of _things_ and _actions_, were
first employed, in the most simple, plain, and easy manner.[20] As the
human mind advanced in knowledge, by observing the character,
relations, and differences of things, words were changed, altered,
compounded, and contracted, so as to keep pace with such advancement;
just as many simple parts of a machine, operating on perfect and
distinct principles, may be combined together and form a most
complicated, curious, and powerful engine, of astonishing power, and
great utility. In the adaptation of steam to locomotives, the principles
on which stationary engines operated were somewhat modified. Some
wheels, shafts, bands, screws, etc., were omitted, others of a different
kind were added, till the whole appeared in a new character, and the
engine, before fixed to a spot, was seen traversing the road with
immense rapidity. The principles of the former engine, so far from being
unessential, were indispensable to the construction of the new one, and
should be clearly understood by him who would build or _use_ the latter.
So, in the formation of language, simple _first_ principles must be
observed and traced thro all their ramifications, by those who would
obtain a clear and thoro knowledge of it, or "read and write it with
propriety."

In mathematics, the four simple rules, addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division, form the basis on which that interesting
science depends. The modifications of these rules, according to their
various capabilities, will give a complete knowledge of all that can be
known of numbers, relations, and proportions, an acme to which all may
aspire, tho none have yet attained it. The principles of language are
equally simple, and, if correctly explained, may be as well understood.
But the difficulty under which we labor in this department of science,
is the paucity of _means_ to trace back to their original form and
meaning many words and phrases in common use among us. Language has been
employed as the vehicle of thought, for six thousand years, and in that
long space has undergone many and strange modifications. At the
dispersion from Babel, and the "confusion of tongues" occasioned
thereby, people were thrown upon their own resources, and left to pick
up by piecemeal such shreds as should afterwards be wove into a system,
and adopted by their respective nations. Wars, pestilence, and famine,
as well as commerce, enterprize, literature, and religion, brought the
different nations into intercourse with each other; and changes were
thus produced in the languages of such people. Whoever will take the
trouble to compare the idioms of speech adopted by those nations whose
affairs, civil, political, and religious, are most intimately allied,
will be convinced of the correctness of the sentiment now advanced.

In the lapse of ages, words would not only change their form, but in a
measure their meaning, so as to correspond with the ideas of those who
use them. Some would become obsolete, and others be adopted in their
stead. Many words are found in the Bible which are not in common use;
and the manner of spelling, as well as some entire words, have been
changed in that book, since it was translated and first published in
1610. With these examples you are familiar, and I shall be spared the
necessity of quoting them. I have already made some extracts from old
writers, and may have occasion to do so again before I close this
lecture.

The words which we class under the head of Contractions, are so altered
and disguised in their appearance, that their etymology and connexion
are not generally understood. It may appear like pedantry in me to
attempt an investigation into their origin and meaning. But to avoid
that charge, I will frankly acknowledge the truth, and own my inability
to do justice to this subject, by offering a full explanation of all the
words which belong to this class. I will be candid, if I am not
successful. But I think most of the words long considered difficult, may
be easily explained; enough to convince you of the feasibility of the
ground we have assumed, and furnish a sample by which to pursue the
subject in all our future inquiries into the etymology of words.

But even if I fail in this matter, I shall have one comfort left, that I
am not alone in the transgression; for no philologist, with few
exceptions, has done any thing like justice to this subject. Our common
grammars have not even attempted an inquiry into the _meaning_ of these
words, but have treated them as tho they had none. Classes, like pens or
reservoirs, are made for them, into which they are thrown, and allowed
to rest, only to be named, without being disturbed. Sometimes, however,
they are found in one enclosure, sometimes in another, more by mistake,
I apprehend, than by intention; for "prepositions" under certain
circumstances are parsed as "adverbs," and "adverbs" as "adjectives,"
and "conjunctions" as either "adverbs" or "prepositions;" and not
unfrequently the whole go off together, like the tail of the dragon,
drawing other respectable words along with them, under the sweeping
cognomen of "adverbial phrases," or "conjunctive expressions;" as, Can
you write your lesson? _Not yet quite well enough._ "_But and if_ that
evil servant,"[21] etc. Mr. Murray says, "the same word is occasionally
used _both as_ a conjunction _and as_ an adverb, and sometimes _as_ a
preposition.

Let these words be correctly defined, their meaning be ferreted out from
the rubbish in which they have been enclosed; or have their dismembered
parts restored to them, they will then appear in their true character,
and their connexion with other words will be found regular and easy.
Until such work is accomplished, they may as well be called
contractions, for such they _mostly_ are, as adverbs or any thing else;
for that appellation we regard as more appropriate than any other.

In the attempts we are about to make, we shall endeavor to be guided by
sound philosophic principles and the light of patient investigation; and
whatever advances we may make shall be in strict accordance with the
true and practical use of these words.

Let us begin with _Adverbs_.

I have not time to go into a thoro investigation of the mistakes into
which grammarians have fallen in their attempts to explain this "part of
speech." Mr. Murray says they "seem originally to have been _contrived_
to express compendiously in _one word_, what must _otherwise_ have
required two or more; as, "he acted _wisely_." They could have been
"_contrived_" for no such purpose, for we have already seen that they
are made up of various words combined together, which are used to
express relation, to define or describe other things. Take the very
example Mr. M. has given. _Wisely_ is made up of two words; _wise_ and
_like_. "He acted wisely," wise-like. What did he _act_? _Wisely_, we
are taught, expresses the "_manner_ or quality" of the verb _act_. But
_act_, in this case, is a neuter or intransitive verb, and _wisely_
expresses the _manner of action_ where there is none! But he must have
_acted something_ which was _wise_ like something else. What did he act?
If he produced no _actions_, how can it be known that he _acted_ wisely
or unwisely? _Action_ or _acts_ is the direct object of to _act_. Hence
the sentence fully stated would stand thus: "He acted _acts_ or
_actions_ like wise actions or acts." But stated at length, it appears
aukward and clumsy, like old fashioned vehicles. We have modified,
improved, cut down, and made eliptical, all of our expressions, as we
have previously observed, to suit the fashions and customs of the age in
which we live; the same as tailors cut our garments to correspond with
the latest fashions.

"The bird sings _sweetly_." The bird sings _songs_, _notes_, or _tunes_,
_like sweet notes_, _tunes,_ or _songs_. The comparison here made, is
not in reference to the agent or action, but the _object_ of the action;
and this explains the whole theory of those _adverbs_, which are said to
"qualify manner" of action. We have already seen that no _action_, as
such, can exist, or be conceived to exist, separate(-ed) from the
_thing_ or _agent_ which _acts_; and such action can only be determined
by the _changed_ or altered condition of something which is the _object_
of such action. How then, can any word, in truth, or in thought, be
known to _qualify_ the action, as distinct from the object or agent? And
if it does not in _fact_, how can we explain words to children, or to
our own minds, so as to understand what is not true?

Hence all words of this character are adjectives, describing one thing
by its relation or likeness to another, and as such, admit of
comparison; as, a likely man, a _very_ likely man, a likelier, and the
_likeliest_ man. "He is the _most likely_ pedlar I ever knew." "He is
_more liable_ to be deceived." "A _lively_ little fellow." "He is
worthless." He is worth less, _less worthy_ of respect and confidence.
"He writes very correctly." He writes his letters and words _like very
correct_ letters. But I need not enlarge. You have only to bear in mind
the fact, that _ly_ is a contraction of _like_, which is often retained
in many words; as god_like_, christian_like_, etc., and search for a
definition accordingly; and you will find no trouble in disposing of a
large portion of this adverb family.

It is a curious fact, and should be maturely considered by all who still
adhere to the neuter verb theory, that adverbs _qualify neuter_ as well
as active verbs, and express the _quality_ or _manner of action_, where
there is none! Adverbs express "manner of action" in a neuter verb! When
a person starts wrong it is very difficult to go right. The safest
course is to return back and start again.

Adverbs have been divided into classes, varying from _eleven_ to
_seventy-two_, to suit the fancies of those who have only observed the
nice shades of form which these words have assumed. But a bonnet is a
bonnet, let its shape, form, or fashion, be what it may. You may put on
as many trimmings, flowers, bows, and ribbons, as you please; it is a
bonnet still; and when we speak of it we will call it a _bonnet_, and
talk about its _appendages_. But when it is constructed into something
else, then we will give it a new name.

Adjectives, we have said, are _derived_ from either nouns or verbs, and
we now contend that the words formerly regarded as adverbs are either
adjectives, nouns, or verbs. In defence of this sentiment we will
adduce a few words in this place for examples.

=Ago.= "Three years _ago_, we dwelt in the country." This word is a past
participle from the verb _ago_, meaning the same as _gone_ or _agone_,
and was so used a few centuries _ago_--_agone_, or _gone by_.

    "For euer the latter ende of ioye is wo,
    God wotte, worldly ioye is soone _ago_."
                              _Chaucer._

    "For if it erst was well, tho was it bet
    A thousand folde, this nedeth it not require
    _Ago_ was euery sorowe and euery fere."
                              _Troylus, boke 3, p. 2._

    "Of such examples as I finde
    Upon this point of tyme _agone_
    I thinke for to tellen one."
                              _Gower_, lib. 5, p. 1.

    "Which is no more than has been done
    By knights for ladies, long _agone_."
                              _Hudibras._

    "Twenty years _agone_."
                              _Tillotson's sermon._

    "Are all _the go_."
                              _Knickerbocker._

=Astray.= "They went astray." _Astrayed_, wandered or were scattered,
and of course soon became _estranged_ from each other. Farmers all know
what it is for cattle to _stray_ from home; and many parents have felt
the keen pangs of sorrow when their sons _strayed_ from the paths of
virtue. In that condition they are _astray-ed_.

    "This prest was drank and goth _astrayede_."

    "Achab to the bottle went.
    When Benedad for all his shelde
    Him slough, so that upon the felde
    His people goth aboute _astraie_."
                              _Gower._

=Awake.= "He is _awake_." "Samson _awaked_ out of his sleep." "That I
may _awake_ him out of sleep." "It is high time to _awake_." "As a man
that is _wakened_ out of sleep." The Irish hold _a wake_--they do not
sleep the night after the loss of friends.

=Asleep.=

    "When that pyte, which longe _on sleep_ doth tary
    Hath set the fyne of al my heuynesse."
                              _Chaucer, La belle dame, p. 1. c. 1._

    "Ful sound _on sleep_ did caucht thare rest be kind."
                              _Douglas_, b. 9, p. 283.

"In these provynces the fayth of Chryste was all quenchyd and _in
sleepe_."--_Fabian._

A numerous portion of these contractions are nouns, which, from their
frequent recurrence, are used without their usual connexion with small
words. The letter _a_ is compounded with many of these words, which may
have been joined to them by habit, or as a preposition, meaning _on_,
_to_, _at_, _in_, as it is used in the french and some other languages.
You often hear expressions like these, "he is _a_-going; he is
_a_-writing; he began _a_-new," etc. The old adverbs which take this
letter, you can easily analyze; as, "The house is _a_-fire"--on fire;
"He fell _a_-sleep"--he fell _on_ sleep. "When deep sleep falleth on
men."--_Job._ "He stept _a_-side"--on one side. "He came _a_-board"--on
board. "They put it _a_-foot"--on foot. "He went _a_-way"--a way,
followed some _course_, to a distance. "Blue bonnets are all the _go_
now _a_-days," etc.

The following extracts will give you an idea of the etymology of these
words:

    "Turnus seyes the Troianis in grete yre,
    And al thare schyppis and navy set _in fire_."
                              _Douglas_, b. 9, p. 274.

    "Now hand in hand the dynt lichtis with _ane_ swak,
    Now bendis he up his bourdon with _ane_ mynt,
    _On side_ (a-side) he bradis for to eschew the dynt."
                              _Idem._

    "That easter fire and flame aboute
    Both at mouth and at nase
    So that thei setten all _on blaze_," (ablaze.)
                              _Gower._

    "And tyl a wicked deth him take
    _Him had_ leuer _asondre_ (a-sunder) shake
    And let al his lymmes _asondre_ ryue
    Thane leaue his richesse in his lyue."
                              _Chaucer._

Examples of this kind might be multiplied to an indefinite length. But
the above will suffice to give you an idea of the former use of these
words, and also, by comparison with the present, of the changes which
have taken place in the method of spelling within a few centuries.

A large portion of adverbs relate to _time_ and _place_, because many of
our ideas, and much of our language, are employed in reference to them;
as, _then_, _when_, _where_, _there_, _here_, _hence_, _whence_,
_thence_, _while_, _till_, _whether_, etc. These are compound words
considerably disguised in their meaning and formation. Let us briefly
notice some of them.

_Per annum_ is a latin phrase, _for the year_, a _year_; and _the annum_
is _the year_, _round_ or _period_ of time, from which it was corrupted
gradually into its present shape. _Thanne_, tha anne, _thane_, _thenne_,
_then_, _than_, are different forms of the same word.

"We see nowe bi a mirror in darcnesse: thanne forsathe, face to face.
Nowe I know of partye; _thanne_ forsathe schal know as I am knowen."--1.
Cor. 13: 12. _Translation in 1350._

I have a translation of the same passage in 1586, which stands thus:
"For nowe we see through a glasse darkley: but _thene_ face to face: now
I know in part: but _then_ shal I know even as I am knowen." Here
several words are spelled differently in the same verse.

=Then=, _the anne_, that time. =When=, _wha anne_, "_wha-icht-anne_,"
which, or what _anne_, period of time.

_Area_ means an open space, a plat of ground, a spot or place. Arena is
from the same etymon, altered in application. =There=, _the area_, the
_place_ or _spot_. "If we go _there_," to that place. =Where=, which, or
what ("wha-icht area") place. =Here=, _his_ (latin word for _this_,)
_area_, this place. These words refer to _place_, _state_, or
_condition_.

_While_ is another spelling for _wheel_. "To while away our time," is to
_pass_, spend, or _wheel_ it away. _While_ applies to the _period_, or
space of time, in which something _wheels_, _whirls_, _turns_ round, or
transpires; as, "You had better remain here _while_ (during the time) he
examines whether it is prudent for you to go."

=Till= is _to while_, to the _period_ at which something is expected to
follow. "If I will that he tarry _till_ (to the time) I come what is
that to thee?"

The idea of _time_ and _place_ are often blended together. It is not
uncommon to hear lads and professed scholars, in some parts of our
country say "down _till_ the bottom, over _till_ the woods." etc. Altho
we do not regard such expressions correct, yet they serve to explain the
meaning of the word. The only mistake is in applying it to _place_
instead of _time_.

=Whether= is _which either_. "Shew _whether_ of these _two_ thou hast
chosen."--_Acts 1: 24._ It is more frequently applied in modern times to
circumstance and events _than to_ persons and things. "I will let you
know _whether_ I _will_ or _will not_ adopt it," one or the other.

=Together= signifies two or more united. _Gethered_ is the past
participle of _gather_.

    "As Mailie, an' her lambs _thegither_,
    Were ae day nibbling on the tether."
                              _Burns._

=Ever= means _time_, _age_, _period_. It originally and essentially
signified _life_. _For ever_ is for the age or period. _For ever_ and
_ever_, to the ages of ages. _Ever-lasting_ is _age-lasting_.
Ever-lasting hills, snows, landmarks, etc.

=Never=, _ne-ever_, _not ever_, at no time, age or period.

=When-ever.=--At what point or space of _time_ or _age_.

=What-ever.=--What thing, fact, circumstance, or event.

=Where-ever.=--To, at, or in what place, period, age, or time.

=Whither-so-ever=, which-way-so-ever, where-so-ever, never-the-less,
etc. need only be analyzed, and their meaning will appear obvious to
all.

=Oft=, _often_, _oft-times_, often-_times_, can be understood by all,
because the noun to which they belong is _oft-en_ retained in practice.

=Once=, twice, at one time, two times.

=Hence=, _thence_, _whence_, from _this_, _that_, or _what_, place,
spot, circumstance, post, or starting place.

=Hence-for-ward=, _hence-forth_, in time _to come_, after this period.

=Here-after=, after this _era_, or present time.

=Hither=, to this spot or place. _Thither_, to that place. _Hither-to_,
_hither-ward_, etc. the same as _to you ward_, or to God ward, still
retained in our bibles.

=Per-haps=, it may hap. _Perchance_, _peradventure_, by chance, by
adventure. The latin _per_ means _by_.

=Not=, no ought, not any, nothing. It is a compound of _ne_ and _ought_
or _a_ught.

=Or= is a contraction from other, and _nor_ from _ne-or_, no-or, no
other.

=No-wise=, no ways. I will go, or, other-wise, in another way or manner,
you must go.

=Than=, _the ane_, the one, that one, alluding to a particular object
with which a comparison is made; as, This book is larger _than_ that
bible. That _one_ bible, this book is larger. It is always used with the
comparative degree, to define particularly the object with which the
comparison is made. Talent is better than flattery. Than flattery, often
bestowed regardless of merit, talent is better.

=As= is an adjective, in extensive use. It means the, this, that, these,
the same, etc. It is a defining word of the first kind. You practice
_as_ you have been taught--_the same duties_ or _principles_ understood.
We use language _as_ we have learned it; in _the same_ way or manner. It
is often associated with other words to particularly specify the way,
manner, or degree, in which something is done or compared. I can go _as
well as_ you. In _the same well_, easy, convenient way or manner you can
go, I can go in _the same_ way. He was _as_ learned, _as_ pious, _as_
benevolent, _as_ brave, _as_ faithful, _as_ ardent. These are purely
adjectives, used to denote the degree of the likeness or similarity
between the things compared. Secondary words are often added to this, to
aid the distinction or definition; as, (_the same_ illustrated,) He is
_just as willing_. I am _quite as well_ pleased without it. _As_, like
many other adjectives, often occurs without a noun expressed, in which
case it was formerly parsed by Murray himself _as_ (like, or the same) a
relative pronoun; as, "And indeed it seldom at any period extends to the
tip, _as happens_ in acute diseases."--_Dr. Sweetster._ "The ground I
have assumed is tenable, _as will appear_."--_Webster._ "Bonaparte had
a special motive in decorating Paris, for 'Paris is France, _as has_
often been observed."--_Channing._ "The words are such _as
seem_."--_Murray's Reader! p. 16, intro._

=So= has nearly the same signification as the word last noticed, and is
frequently used along with it, to define the other member of the
comparison. _As_ far _as_ I can understand, _so_ far I approve. _As_ he
directed, _so_ I obeyed. It very often occurs as a secondary adjective;
as, "In pious and benevolent offices _so_ simple, _so_ minute, _so_
steady, _so_ habitual, that they will carry," etc. "He pursued a course
_so_ unvarying."--_Channing._

These words are the most important of any small ones in our vocabulary,
because (_for this cause_, be this the cause, this is the cause) they
are the most frequently used; and yet there are no words _so_ little
understood, or _so_ much abused by grammarians, _as_ these are.

We have barely time to notice the remaining parts of speech.
"Conjunctions" are defined to be a "part of speech void of
signification, but so formed as to help signification, by making two or
more significant sentences to be one significant sentence." Mr. Harris
gives about forty "species." Murray admits of only the _dis_-junctive
and copulative, and reduces the whole list of words to twenty-four. But
what is meant by a _dis_-junctive _con_-junctive word, is left for you
to determine. It must be in keeping with _in_definite _defining_
articles, and _post_-positive _pre_-positions. He says, "it joins words,
but disjoins the sense."[22] And what is a _word_ with out _sense_,"
pray tell us? If "words are the signs of ideas," how, in the name of
reason, can you give the sign and separate the sense? You can as well
separate the shadow from the substance, or a quality from matter.

We have already noticed Rule 18, which teaches the use of
conjunctions. Under that rule, you may examine these examples. "As it
_was_ in the beginning, _is_ now, _and_ ever _shall be_."--_Common
Prayer._ "What I _do_, _have done,_ or _may_ hereafter _do_, _has
been_, and _will_ always _be_ matter of inclination, the gratifying of
which _pays_ itself: and I _have_ no more merit in employing my time
and money in the way I _am known_ to do, than another has in other
occupations."--_Howard._

The following examples must suffice.

=If.= This word is derived from the saxon _gifan_, and was formerly
written _giff_, _gyff_, _gif_, _geve_, _give_, _yiff_, _yef_, _yeve_. It
signifies _give_, _grant_, _allow_, _suppose_, _admit_, and is always a
verb in the imperative mood, having the following sentence or idea for
its object. "_If_ a pound of sugar cost ten cents, what will ten pounds
cost?" _Give_, grant, allow, suppose, (the fact,) _one pound cost_, etc.
In this case the supposition which stands as a predicate--_one pound of
sugar cost ten cents_, is the object of _if_--the thing to be allowed,
supposed, or granted, and from which the conclusion as to the cost of
_ten_ pounds is to be drawn.

"He will assist us if he has the means." Allow, admit, (the fact,) he
has the means, he will assist us.

    "_Gif_ luf be vertew, than is it leful thing;
    _Gif_ it be vice, it is your undoing."
                              _Douglas_ p. 95.

    "Ne I ne wol non reherce, _yef_ that I may."
                              _Chaucer._

    "She was so charitable and so pytous
    She wolde wepe _yf that_ she sawe a mous
    Caught in a trappe, _if_ it were deed or bledde."
                              _Prioresse._

    "O haste and come to my master dear."

    "_Gin_ ye be Barbara Allen."
                              _Burns._

=But.= This word has two opposite significations. It is derived from two
different radicals. _But_, from the saxon _be_ and _utan_, _out_, means
_be out_, _leave out_, _save_, _except_, _omit_, as, "all _but_ one are
here." _Leave out_, _except_, _one_, all are here.

    "Heaven from all creation hides the book of fate
    All _but_ (_save_, _except_) the page prescribed our present state."

    "When nought _but_ (_leave out_) the _torrent_ is heard on the hill,
    And nought _but_ (_save_) the nightingale's _song_ in the grove."

"Nothing _but fear_ restrains him." In these cases the direct _objects_
of the verb, the things to be omitted are expressed.

_But_ is also derived from _botan_, which signifies _to add_,
_superadd_, _join_ or _unite_; as, in the old form of a deed, "it is
_butted_ and bounded as follows." Two animals _butt_ their heads
together. The _butt_ of a log is that end which was _joined_ to the
stump. A _butt_, _butment_ or _a-butment_ is the joined end, where there
is a connexion with something else. A _butt_ of ridicule is an object to
which ridicule is attached.

    "Not only saw he all that was,
    _But (add) much_ that never came to pass."
                              _M'Fingal._

_To button_, _butt-on_, is derived from the same word, to join one side
to the other, to fasten together. It was formerly spelled _botan_,
_boote_, _bote_, _bot_, _butte_, _bute_, _but_. It is still spelled
_boot_ in certain cases as a verb; as,

    "What _boots it_ thee to fly from pole to pole,
    Hang o'er the earth, and with the planets roll?
    What boots ( ) thro space's fartherest bourns to roam,
    _If_ thou, O man, a stranger art at home?"
                              _Grainger._

    "If love had _booted_ care or cost."

A man exchanged his house in the city for a farm, and received fifty
dollars to _boot_; _to add_ to his property, and make the exchange
equal.

_Let_ presents the same construction in form and meaning as _but_, for
it is derived from two radicals of opposite significations. It means
sometimes to _permit_ or _allow_; as, _let_ me go; _let_ me have it; and
to _hinder_ or _prevent_; as, "I proposed to come unto you, _but_ (add
this fact) I was _let_ hitherto."--_Rom. 1: 13._ "He who now _letteth_,
will _let_ until he be taken out of the way."--_2 Thess. 2: 7._

=And= is a past participle signifying _added_, _one-ed_, _joined_. It
was formerly placed after the words; as, "James, John, David, _and_,
(_united to-_gether_-ed_,) go to school." We now place it _before_ the
last word.

=Tho=, _altho_, _yet_. "Tho (_admit_, _allow_, _the fact_) he slay me,
yet (_get_, _have_, _know_, _the fact_) I will trust in him." _Yes_ is
from the same word as _yet_. It means _get_ or _have_ my consent to the
question asked. _Nay_ is the opposite of _yes_, _ne_-aye, nay, no. The
_ayes_ and _noes_ were called for.

I can pursue this matter no farther. The limits assigned me have been
overrun already. What light may have been afforded you in relation to
these words, will enable you to discover that they have _meaning_ which
must be learned before they can be explained correctly; that done, all
difficulty is removed.

Interjections deserve no attention. They form no part of language, but
may be used by beasts and birds as well as by men. They are indistinct
utterances of emotions, which come not within the range of human speech.




FOOTNOTES:

[1]  The reader is referred to "The Red Book," by William Bearcroft,
     revised by Daniel H. Barnes, late of the New-York High School, as a
     correct system of teaching practical orthography.

[2]  Gall, Spurzheim, and Combe, have reflected a light upon the science
     of the mind, which cannot fail of beneficial results. Tho the
     doctrines of phrenology, as now taught, may prove false--which is
     quite doubtful--or receive extensive modifications, yet the
     consequences to the philosophy of the mind will be vastly useful.
     The very terms employed to express the faculties and affections of
     the mind, are so definite and clear, that phrenology will long
     deserve peculiar regard, if for no other reason than for the
     introduction of a vocabulary, from which may be selected words for
     the communication of ideas upon intellectual subjects.

[3]  Metaphysics originally signified the science of the causes and
     principles of all things. Afterwards it was confined to the
     philosophy of the mind. In our times it has obtained still another
     meaning. Metaphysicians became so abstruse, bewildered, and lost,
     that nobody could understand them; and hence, _metaphysical_ is now
     applied to whatever is abstruse, doubtful, and unintelligible. If a
     speaker is not understood, it is because he is too metaphysical.
     "How did you like the sermon, yesterday?" "Tolerably well; but he
     was too metaphysical for common hearers." They could not understand
     him.

[4]  In this respect, many foreign languages possess a great advantage
     over ours. They can augment or diminish the same word to increase
     or lessen the meaning. For instance; in the Spanish, we can say
     _Hombre_, a man; _Hombron_, a _large_ man; _Hombrecito_, a _young_
     man, or youth; _Hombrecillo_, a _miserable little_ man; _Pagaro_, a
     bird; _Pagarito_, a _pretty little_ bird; _Perro_, a dog;
     _Perrillo_, an _ugly little_ dog; _Perrazo_, a _large_ dog.

     The Indian languages admit of diminutives in a similar way. In the
     Delaware dialect, they are formed by the suffix _tit_, in the class
     of animate nouns; but by _es_, to the inanimate; as, _Senno_, a
     man; _Sennotit_, a _little_ man; _Wikwam_, a house; _Wikwames_, a
     _small_ house.--_Enc. Amer. Art. Indian Languages, vol. 6, p. 586._

[5]  Mr. Harris, in his "Hermes," says, "A preposition is a part of
     speech, _devoid itself of signification_; but so formed as to unite
     two words that are significant, and that refuse to coalesce or
     unite themselves."

     Mr. Murray says, "Prepositions serve to _connect_ words with one
     another, and show the relation between them."

[6]  "Me thou shalt use in what thou wilt, and doe that with a slender
     _twist_, that none can doe with a tough _with_."
                                   _Euphues and his England, p. 136._

     "They had arms under the straw in the boats, and had cut the
     _withes_ that held the oars of the town boats, to prevent any
     pursuit."
                                   _Ludlow's Memoirs, p. 435._

     "The only furniture belonging to the houses, appears to be an
     oblong vessel made of bark, by tying up the ends with a _withe_."
                                   _Cooke's Description of Botany Bay._

[7]  See Galatians, chap. 1, verse 15. "When it pleased God, who
     _separated_ me," &c.

[8]  Acts, xvii, 28.

[9]  St. Pierre's Studies of Nature.--Dr. Hunter's translation, pp.
     172-176.

[10] It is reported on very good authority that the same olive trees
     are now standing in the garden of Gethsemane under which the
     Saviour wept and near which he was betrayed. This is rendered more
     probable from the fact, that a tax is laid, by the Ottoman Porte,
     on all olive trees planted since Palestine passed into the
     possession of the Turks, and that several trees standing in
     Gethsemane do not pay such tribute, while all others do.

[11] We do not assent to the notions of ancient philosophers and poets,
     who believed the doctrine that the world is animated by a soul,
     like the human body, which is the spirit of Deity himself; but that
     by the operation of wise and perfect laws, he exerts a supervision
     in the creation and preservation of all things animate and
     inanimate. Virgil stated the opinions of his times, in his Æneid,
     B. VI. l. 724.

         "Principio coelum, ac terras, camposque liquentes,
         Lucentemque globum, Lunæ, Titaniaque astra
         Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
         Mens agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscet."

         "Know, first, that heaven, and earth's compacted frame,
         And flowing waters, and the starry flame,
         And both the radiant lights, _one common soul_
         Inspires and feeds--and _animates the whole_.
         This active mind, infused thro all the space,
         Unites and mingles with the mighty mass."
                                    _Dryden_, b. VI. l. 980.

     This sentiment, he probably borrowed from Pythagoras and Plato, who
     argue the same sentiment, and divide this spirit into
     "_intellectus_, _intelligentia_, et _natura_"--intellectual,
     intelligent, and natural. Whence, "_Ex hoc Deo, qui est mundi
     anima: quasi decerptæ particulæ sunt vitæ hominum et pecudum._" Or,
     "Omnia animalia ex quatuor elementis et _divino spiritu_ constare
     manifestum est. Trahunt enim a terra carnem, ab aqua humorem, ab
     ære anhelitum, ab igne fervorem, _a divino spiritu
     ingenium_."--_Timeus, chap. 24, and Virgil's Geor. b. 4, l. 220,
     Dryden's trans. l. 322._

     Pope alludes to the same opinion in these lines:

         "All are but parts of one stupendous whole.
         Whose body nature is, and God the soul."

[12] Page 41.

[13] Exodus, iii. 2, 3.

[14] Cardell's grammar.

[15] The Jews long preserved this name in Samaritan letters to keep it
     from being known to strangers. The modern Jews affirm that by this
     mysterious name, engraven on his rod, Moses performed the wonders
     recorded of him; that Jesus stole the name from the temple and put
     it into his thigh between the flesh and skin, and by its power
     accomplished the miracles attributed to him. They think if they
     could pronounce the word correctly, the very heavens and earth
     would tremble, and angels be filled with terror.

[16] Plutarch says, "This title is not only _proper_ but _peculiar to
     God_, because =He= alone is _being_; for mortals have no
     participation of _true being_, because that which _begins_ and
     _ends_, and is constantly _changing_, is never _one_ nor the
     _same_, nor in the same state. The deity on whose temple this word
     was inscribed was called =Apollo=, Apollon, from _a_ negative and
     _pollus_, _many_, because God is =one=, his nature simple, and
     _uncompounded_."--_Vide, Clark's Com._

[17] The same fact may be observed in other languages, for all people
     form language alike, in a way to correspond with their ideas. The
     following hasty examples will illustrate this point.

                _Agent._         _Verb._        _Object._
     _English_  Singers          Sing           Songs
     _French_   Les chanteurs    Chantent       Les chansons
     _Spanish_  Los cantores     Cantan         Las cantinelas
     _Italian_  I cantori        Cantano        I canti
     _Latin_    Cantores         Canunt         Cantus

     _English_  Givers           Give           Gifts
     _French_   Les donneurs     Donnent        Les dons
     _Spanish_  Los donadores    Dan o donan    Los dones
     _Italian_  I danatori       Dano o danano  I doni
     _Latin_    Datores          Donant         Dona

     _English_  Fishers          Fish           Fishes
     _French_   Les pecheurs     Pechent        Les poissons
     _Spanish_  Los pescadores   Pescan         Los peces
     _Italian_  I pescatori      Pescan         I pesci
     _Latin_    Piscatores       Piscantur      Pisces

     _English_  Students         Study          Studies
     _French_   Les etudiens     Etudient       Les etudes
     _Spanish_  Los estudiantes  Estudian       Los estudios
     _Italian_  I studienti      Studiano       I studii
     _Latin_    Studiosi         Student        Studia

[18] Mr. Murray says, "These compounds," _have_, _shall_, _will_,
     _may_, _can_, _must_, _had_, _might_, _could_, _would_, and
     _should_, which he uses as auxiliaries to _help_ conjugate _other_
     verbs, "are, however, to be considered as _different forms_ of the
     _same_ verb." I should like to know, if these words have any thing
     to do with the _principal_ verbs; if they only alter the _form_ of
     the verb which follows them. I _may_, _can_, _must_, _shall_,
     _will_, or _do love_. Are these only different forms of _love_? or
     rather, are they not distinct, important, and original verbs, pure
     and perfect _in_ and _of_ themselves? Ask for their etymons and
     meaning, and then decide.

[19] Diversions of Purley, vol. 1, p. 77.

[20] Dr. Edwards observes, in a communication to the Connecticut Society
     of Arts and Sciences, from personal knowledge, that "the Mohegans
     (Indians) have _no adjectives_ in all their language. Altho it may
     at first seem not only singular and curious, but impossible, that a
     language should exist without adjectives, yet it is an indubitable
     fact." But it is proved that in later times the Indians employ
     adjectives, derived from nouns or verbs, as well as other nations.
     Altho many of their dialects are copious and harmonious, yet they
     suffered no inconvenience from a want of contracted words and
     phrases. They added the ideas of definition and description to the
     things themselves, and expressed them in the _same_ word, in a
     modified form.

[21] Matthew, chap. 24, v. 48.

[22] Examples of a _dis_-junctive conjunction. "They came with her,
     _but_ they went without her."--_Murray._

     Murray is _wrong_, _and_ Cardell is _right_. The simplifiers are
     wrong, _but_ their standard is so likewise.

     "Me he restored to my office, _and_ him he hanged."--_Pharaoh's
     Letter._




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

The following printer's errors have been corrected in this etext.
Changes are indicated in brackets.

Contents       ON NOUNS AMD [AND] PRONOUNS

Lecture I      process of time as ingle [a single]
               will not unfrequenly [unfrequently] represent

Lecture III    German, Danish, Dutch, Sweedish [Swedish]

Lecture V      _David_ killed Goliah [Goliath]

Lecture VI     and cosinder [consider] them in this place

Lecture VII    We are told there are are [are] two articles
               the mother is _mascu.line_ [masculine]
               dress handkerchief.["] The resolution

Lecture VIII   object will be to ascertion [ascertain]
               ["]But wherefore _sits he_ there?
               act _transitively_, acording [according] to

Lecture IX     the pocket of Guy Fawks [Fawkes]
               For we should rember [remember]
               _looks_ like or _resembles_ his brother,["]

Lecture X      A philosophical axiom[.]--Manner
               And our languge [language] should
               ["]I have addressed this volume

Lecture XI     Be not surprized [surprised] when I tell you

Lecture XII    the qualifification [qualification] of an _adverb_,
               --"express neither actionn [action] or passion."

Lecture XIV    trace back to their orignal [original] form
               ["]He stept _a_-side"
               ["]As Mailie, an' her lambs
               ["]Not only saw he all that was,

Footnote 22    Murray is _wroug_ [wrong]






End of Project Gutenberg's Lectures on Language, by William S. Balch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LECTURES ON LANGUAGE ***

***** This file should be named 17594-8.txt or 17594-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/5/9/17594/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Amy Cunningham, Bill Tozier
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Concrete Construction, by 
Halbert P. Gillette and Charles S. Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Concrete Construction
       Methods and Costs

Author: Halbert P. Gillette
        Charles S. Hill

Release Date: March 16, 2008 [EBook #24855]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION ***




Produced by Brian Sogard, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.









CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION

METHODS AND COST

BY

HALBERT P. GILLETTE

_M. Am. Soc. C. E.; M. Am. Inst. M. E._

_Managing Editor, Engineering-Contracting_

AND

CHARLES S. HILL, C. E.

_Associate Editor, Engineering-Contracting_

NEW YORK AND CHICAGO

THE MYRON C. CLARK PUBLISHING CO.

1908


COPYRIGHT. 1908

BY

THE MYRON C. CLARK PUBLISHING CO.


Transcriber's note:

For Text: A word surrounded by a cedilla such as ~this~ signifies that
the word is bolded in the text. A word surrounded by underscores like
_this_ signifies the word is italics in the text. The italic and bold
markup for single italized letters (such as variables in equations) and
"foreign" abbreviations are deleted for easier reading.

For numbers and equations: Parentheses have been added to clarify
fractions. Underscores before bracketed numbers in equations denote a
subscript. Superscripts are designated with a caret and brackets, e.g.
11.1^{3} is 11.1 to the third power. Greek letters in equations are
translated to their English version.

Minor typos have been corrected.




PREFACE.


How best to perform construction work and what it will cost for
materials, labor, plant and general expenses are matters of vital
interest to engineers and contractors. This book is a treatise on the
methods and cost of concrete construction. No attempt has been made to
present the subject of cement testing which is already covered by Mr. W.
Purves Taylor's excellent book, nor to discuss the physical properties
of cements and concrete, as they are discussed by Falk and by Sabin, nor
to consider reinforced concrete design as do Turneaure and Maurer or
Buel and Hill, nor to present a general treatise on cements, mortars and
concrete construction like that of Reid or of Taylor and Thompson. On
the contrary, the authors have handled the subject of concrete
construction solely from the viewpoint of the builder of concrete
structures. By doing this they have been able to crowd a great amount of
detailed information on methods and costs of concrete construction into
a volume of moderate size.

Though the special information contained in the book is of most
particular assistance to the contractor or engineer engaged in the
actual work of making and placing concrete, it is believed that it will
also prove highly useful to the designing engineer and to the architect.
It seems plain that no designer of concrete structures can be a really
good designer without having a profound knowledge of methods of
construction and of detailed costs. This book, it is believed, gives
these methods and cost data in greater number and more thoroughly
analyzed than they can be found elsewhere in engineering literature.

The costs and other facts contained in the book have been collected from
a multitude of sources, from the engineering journals, from the
transactions of the engineering societies, from Government Reports and
from the personal records of the authors and of other engineers and
contractors. It is but fair to say that the great bulk of the matter
contained in the book, though portions of it have appeared previously
in other forms in the authors' contributions to the technical press, was
collected and worked up originally by the authors. Where this has not
been the case the original data have been added to and re-analyzed by
the authors. Under these circumstances it has been impracticable to give
specific credit in the pages of the book to every source from which the
authors have drawn aid. They wish here to acknowledge, therefore, the
help secured from many engineers and contractors, from the volumes of
Engineering News, Engineering Record and Engineering-Contracting, and
from the Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers and the
proceedings and papers of various other civil engineering societies and
organizations of concrete workers. The work done by these journals and
societies in gathering and publishing information on concrete
construction is of great and enduring value and deserves full
acknowledgment.

In answer to any possible inquiry as to the relative parts of the work
done by the two authors in preparing this book, they will answer that it
has been truly the labor of both in every part.

                                                  H. P. G.
                                                  C. S. H.
     Chicago, Ill., April 15, 1908.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                  PAGE

CHAPTER I.--METHODS AND COST OF SELECTING AND PREPARING
MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE.                                              1

~Cement:~ Portland Cement--Natural Cement--Slag Cement--Size and Weight of
Barrels of Cement--Specifications and Testing. ~Sand:~ Properties of Good
Sand--Cost of Sand--Washing Sand; Washing with Hose; Washing with Sand
Ejectors; Washing with Tank Washers. ~Aggregates:~ Broken
Stone--Gravel--Slag and Cinders--Balanced Aggregate--Size of
Aggregate--Cost of Aggregate--Screened and Crusher Run Stone for
Concrete--Quarrying and Crushing Stone--Screening and Washing Gravel.


CHAPTER II.--THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PROPORTIONING CONCRETE.         25

~Voids:~ Voids in Sand; Effect of Mixture--Effect of Size of Grains--Voids
in Broken Stone and Gravel; Effect of Method of Loading; Test
Determinations; Specific Gravity; Effect of Hauling--Theory of the
Quantity of Cement in Mortar; Tables of Quantities in Mortar--Tables of
Quantities in Concrete--Percentage of Water in Concrete--Methods of
Measuring and Weighing; Automatic Measuring Devices.


CHAPTER III.--METHODS AND COSTS OF MAKING AND PLACING
CONCRETE BY HAND.                                                   45

Loading into Stock Piles--Loading from Stock Piles--Transporting
Materials to Mixing Boards--Mixing--Loading and Hauling Mixed
Concrete--Dumping, Spreading and Ramming--Cost of
Superintendence--Summary of Costs.


CHAPTER IV.--METHODS AND COST OF MAKING AND PLACING
CONCRETE BY MACHINE.                                                61

Introduction--Conveying and Hoisting Devices--Unloading with Grab
Buckets--Inclines--Trestle and Car Plants--Cableways--Belt
Conveyors--Chutes--Methods of Charging Mixers--Charging by Gravity from
Overhead Bins; Charging with Wheelbarrows; Charging with Cars; Charging
by Shoveling; Charging with Derricks--Types of Mixers; Batch Mixers;
Chicago Improved Cube Tilting Mixer, Ransome Non-Tilting Mixer, Smith
Tilting Mixer; Continuous Mixers; Eureka Automatic Feed Mixer; Gravity
Mixers; Gilbreth Trough Mixer, Hains Gravity Mixer--Output of
Mixers--Mixer Efficiency.


CHAPTER V.--METHODS AND COST OF DEPOSITING CONCRETE
UNDER WATER AND OF SUBAQUEOUS GROUTING.                             86

Introduction--Depositing in Closed Buckets; O'Rourke Bucket; Cyclopean
Bucket; Steubner Bucket--Depositing in Bags--Depositing Through a
Tremie; Charlestown Bridge; Arch Bridge Piers, France; Nussdorf Lock,
Vienna--Grouting Submerged Stone; Tests of H. F. White; Hermitage
Breakwater.


CHAPTER VI.--METHODS AND COST OF MAKING AND USING RUBBLE
AND ASPHALTIC CONCRETE.                                             98

Introduction--Rubble Concrete: Chattahoochee River Dam; Barossa
Dam, South Australia; other Rubble Concrete Dams, Boonton Dam,
Spier Falls Dam, Hemet Dam, Small Reservoir Dam, Boyd's Corner
Dam; Abutment for Railway Bridge; English Data, Tharsis & Calamas
Ry., Bridge Piers, Nova Scotia--Asphalt Concrete; Slope Paving for
Earth Dam; Base for Mill Floor.


CHAPTER VII.--METHODS AND COST OF LAYING CONCRETE IN
FREEZING WEATHER.                                                  112

Introduction--Lowering the Freezing Point of the Mixing Water; Common
Salt (Sodium Chloride):--Freezing Temperature Chart--Heating Concrete
Materials; Portable Heaters; Heating in Stationary Bins; Other Examples
of Heating Methods, Power Plant, Billings, Mont., Wachusett Dam,
Huronian Power Co. Dam, Arch Bridge, Piano, Ill., Chicago, Burlington &
Quincy R. R. Work, Heating in Water Tank--Covering and Housing the Work;
Method of Housing in Dam, Chaudiere Falls, Quebec; Method of Housing in
Building Work.


CHAPTER VIII.--METHODS AND COST OF FINISHING CONCRETE
SURFACES                                                          124

Imperfectly Made Forms--Imperfect Mixing and
Placing--Efflorescence--Spaded and Troweled Finishes--Plaster and Stucco
Finish--Mortar and Cement Facing--Special Facing Mixtures for Minimizing
Form Marks--Washes--Finishing by Scrubbing and Washing--Finishing by
Etching with Acid--Tooling Concrete Surfaces--Gravel or Pebble Surface
Finish--Colored Facing.


CHAPTER IX.--METHODS AND COST OF FORM CONSTRUCTION                136

Introduction--Effect of Design on Form Work--Kind of Lumber--Finish and
Dimensions of Lumber--Computation of Forms--Design and
Construction--Unit Construction of Forms--Lubrication of
Forms--Falsework and Bracing--Time for and Method of Removing
Forms--Estimating and Cost of Form Work.


CHAPTER X.--METHODS AND COST OF CONCRETE PILE AND PIER
CONSTRUCTION                                                      151

Introduction--Molding Piles in Place; Method of Constructing Raymond
Piles; Method of Constructing Simplex Piles; Method of Constructing
Piles with Enlarged Footings; Method of Constructing Piles
by the Compressol System; Method of Constructing Piers in Caissons--Molding
Piles for Driving--Driving Molded Piles: Method and Cost
of Molding and Jetting Piles for an Ocean Pier; Method of Molding
and Jetting Square Piles for a Building Foundation; Method of Molding
and Jetting Corrugated Piles for a Building Foundation; Method of
Molding and Driving Round Piles; Molding and Driving Square Piles
for a Building Foundation; Method of Molding and Driving Octagonal
Piles--Method and Cost of Making Reinforced Piles by Rolling.


CHAPTER XI.--METHODS AND COST OF HEAVY CONCRETE WORK
IN FORTIFICATIONS, LOCKS, DAMS, BREAKWATERS AND
PIERS                                                             184

Introduction--Fortification Work: Gun Emplacement, Staten Island, N. Y.,
Mortar Battery Platform, Tampa Bay, Fla., Emplacement for Battery, Tampa
Bay, Fla.; U. S. Fortification Work--Lock Walls, Cascades Canal--Locks,
Coosa River, Alabama--Lock Walls, Illinois & Mississippi Canal--Hand
Mixing and Placing Canal Lock Foundations--Breakwater at Marquette,
Mich.--Breakwater, Buffalo, N. Y.--Breakwater, Port Colborne,
Ontario--Concrete Block Pier, Superior Entry, Wisconsin--Dam, Richmond,
Ind.--Dam at McCall Ferry, Pa.--Dam at Chaudiere Falls, Quebec.


CHAPTER XII.--METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING BRIDGE
PIERS AND ABUTMENTS                                               230

Introduction--Rectangular Pier for a Railway Bridge--Backing for
Bridge Piers and Abutments--Pneumatic Caissons, Williamsburg Bridge--Filling
Pier Cylinders--Piers, Calf Killer River Bridge--Constructing
21 Bridge Piers--Permanent Way Structures, Kansas City Outer Belt
& Electric Ry.--Plate Girder Bridge Abutments--Abutments and Piers,
Lonesome Valley Viaduct--Hand Mixing and Wheelbarrow Work for
Bridge Piers.


CHAPTER XIII.--METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING RETAINING
WALLS                                                             259

Introduction--Comparative Economy of Plain and Reinforced Concrete
Walls--Form Construction--Mixing and Placing Concrete--Walls in
Trench--Chicago Drainage Canal--Grand Central Terminal, New
York, N. Y.--Wall for Railway Yard--Footing for Rubble Stone Retaining
Walls--Track Elevation, Allegheny, Pa.


CHAPTER XIV.--METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING CONCRETE
FOUNDATIONS FOR PAVEMENT                                          288

Introduction--Mixtures Employed--Distribution of Stock Piles--Hints on
Hand Mixing--Methods of Machine Mixing--Foundation for Stone Block
Pavement, New York, N. Y.--Foundation for Pavement, New Orleans,
La.--Foundation for Pavement, Toronto, Canada--Miscellaneous Examples of
Pavement Foundation Work--Foundation for Brick Pavement, Champaign,
Ill.--Foundation Construction using Continuous Mixers.--Foundation
Construction for Street Railway Track Using Continuous
Mixers--Foundation Construction Using Batch Mixers and Wagon
Haulage--Foundation Construction Using a Traction Mixer--Foundation
Construction Using a Continuous Mixer--Foundation Construction Using a
Portable Batch Mixer.


CHAPTER XV.--METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS,
PAVEMENTS, AND CURB AND GUTTER                                    307

Introduction--~Cement Sidewalks:~ General Method of Construction--Bonding
of Wearing Surface and Base--Protection of Work from Sun and
Frost--Cause and Prevention of Cracks--Cost of Cement Walks; Toronto,
Ont.; Quincy, Mass.; San Francisco, Cal.; Cost in Iowa. ~Concrete
Pavement:~ Windsor, Ontario--Richmond, Ind. ~Concrete Curb and Gutter:~
Form Construction--Concrete Mixtures and Concreting--Cost of Curb and
Gutter: Ottawa, Canada; Champaign, Ill.


CHAPTER XVI.--METHODS AND COST OF LINING TUNNELS AND
SUBWAYS                                                           328

Introduction--Capitol Hill Tunnel, Pennsylvania R. R., Washington, D.
C.--Constructing Side Walls in Relining Mullan Tunnel--Lining a Short
Tunnel, Peekskill, N. Y.--Cascade Tunnel Great Northern Ry.--Relining
Hodges Pass Tunnel, Oregon Short Line Ry.--Lining a 4,000-ft.
Tunnel--Method of Mixing and Placing Concrete for a Tunnel
Lining--Gunnison Tunnel--New York Rapid Transit Subway--Traveling Forms
for Lining New York Rapid Transit Railway Tunnels--Subway Lining, Long
Island R. R., Brooklyn, N. Y.


CHAPTER XVII.--METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING ARCH
AND GIRDER BRIDGES                                                363

Introduction--Centers--Mixing and Transporting Concrete; Cableway
Plants; Car Plant for 4-Span Arch Bridge; Hoist and Car Plant for
21-Span Arch Viaduct; Traveling Derrick Plant for 4-Span Arch
Bridge--Concrete Highway Bridges Green County, Iowa--Highway Girder
Bridges--Molding Slabs for Girder Bridges--Connecticut Ave. Bridge,
Washington, D. C--Arch Bridges, Elkhart, Ind.--Arch Bridge, Plainwell,
Mich.--Five Span Arch Bridge--Arch Bridge, Grand Rapids, Mich.


CHAPTER XVIII.--METHODS AND COST OF CULVERT CONSTRUCTION        414

Introduction--Box Culvert Construction, C., B. & Q. R. R.--Arch Culvert
Costs, N. C. & St. L. Ry.; 18-ft. Arch Culvert; Six Arch Culverts 6 to
16-ft. Span; 14-3/4-ft. Arch Culvert--Culverts for New Construction,
Wabash Ry.--Small Arch Culvert Costs, Pennsylvania R. R.--26-ft. Span
Arch Culvert--12-ft. Culvert, Kalamazoo, Mich.--Method and Cost of
Molding Culvert Pipe.


CHAPTER XIX.--METHODS AND COST OF REINFORCED CONCRETE
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION                                             433

Introduction--Construction, Erection and Removal of Forms: Column Forms;
Rectangular Columns; Polygonal Columns; Circular Columns; Ornamental
Columns--Slab and Girder Forms; Slab and I-Beam Floors; Concrete Slab
and Girder Floors--Wall Forms--Erecting Forms--Removing Forms,
Fabrication and Placing Reinforcement; Fabrication; Placing--Mixing,
Transporting and Placing Concrete: Mixing; Transporting; Bucket Hoists;
Platform Hoists; Derricks--Placing and Ramming--Constructing Wall
Columns for a Brick Building--Floor and Column Construction for a
Six-Story Building--Wall and Roof Construction for One-Story Car
Barn--Constructing Wall Columns for a One-Story Machine
Shop--Constructing One-Story Walls with Movable Forms and Gallows
Frames--Floor and Roof Construction for Four-Story Garage.


CHAPTER XX.--METHOD AND COST OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
OF SEPARATELY MOLDED MEMBERS                                      515

Introduction--Column, Girder and Slab Construction: Warehouses,
Brooklyn, N. Y.; Factory, Reading, Pa.; Kilnhouse, New Village, N.
J.--Hollow Block Wall Construction: Factory Buildings, Grand Rapids,
Mich.; Residence, Quogue, N. Y., Two-Story Building, Albuquerque, N.
Mex.; General Cost Data.


CHAPTER XXI.--METHODS AND COST OF AQUEDUCT AND SEWER
CONSTRUCTION                                                      532

Introduction--Forms and Centers--Concreting--Reinforced Conduit, Salt
River Irrigation Works, Arizona--Conduit, Torresdale Filters,
Philadelphia, Pa.--Conduit, Jersey City Water Supply, Twin Tube Water
Conduit at Newark, N. J.--66-in. Circular Sewer, South Bend, Ind.--Sewer
Invert Haverhill, Mass.--29-ft. Sewer, St. Louis, Mo.--Sewer,
Middlesborough, Ky.--Intercepting Sewer, Cleveland, Ohio--Reinforced
Concrete Sewer, Wilmington, Del.--Sewer with Monolithic Invert and Block
Arch--Cost of Block Manholes--Cement Pipe Constructed in Place--Pipe
Sewer, St. Joseph, Mo.--Cost of Molding Small Cement Pipe--Molded Pipe
Water Main, Swansea, England.


CHAPTER XXII.--METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING RESERVOIRS
AND TANKS                                                         588

Introduction--Small Covered Reservoir--500,000 Gallon Covered Reservoir,
Ft. Meade, So. Dak.--Circular Reservoir, Bloomington, Ill.--Standpipe at
Attleborough, Mass.--Gas Holder Tank, Des Moines, Iowa--Gas Holder Tank,
New York City--Lining a Reservoir, Quincy, Mass.--Relining a Reservoir,
Chelsea, Mass.--Lining Jerome Park Reservoir--Reservoir Floor, Canton,
Ill.--Reservoir Floor, Pittsburg, Pa.--Constructing a Silo--Grained Arch
Reservoir Roof--Grain Elevator Bins.


CHAPTER XXIII.--METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING ORNAMENTAL
WORK                                                              636

Introduction--Separately Molded Ornaments: Wooden Molds; Iron Molds;
Sand Molding; Plaster Molds--Ornaments Molded in Place: Big Muddy
Bridge; Forest Park Bridge; Miscellaneous Structures.


CHAPTER XXIV.--MISCELLANEOUS METHODS AND COSTS                    653

Introduction--Drilling and Blasting Concrete--Bench Monuments, Chicago,
III.--Pole Base--Mile Post--Bonding New Concrete to Old--Dimensions and
Capacities of Mixers--Data for Estimating Weight of Steel in Reinforced
Concrete; Computing Weight from Percentage of Volume; Weights and
Dimensions of Plain and Special Reinforcing Metals--Recipes for Coloring
Mortars.


CHAPTER XXV.--METHODS AND COST OF WATERPROOFING CONCRETE
STRUCTURES                                                        667

Impervious Concrete Mixtures--Star Stetten Cement--Medusa Waterproofing
Compound--Novoid Waterproofing Compound--Impermeable Coatings and
Washes: Bituminous Coatings; Szerelmey Stone Liquid Wash; Sylvester
Wash; Sylvester Mortars; Hydrolithic Coating; Cement Mortar Coatings;
Oil and Paraffine Washes--Impermeable Diaphragms; Long Island R. R.
Subway; New York Rapid Transit Subway.




Concrete Construction Methods and Cost




CHAPTER I.

METHODS AND COST OF SELECTING AND PREPARING MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE.


Concrete is an artificial stone produced by mixing cement mortar with
broken stone, gravel, broken slag, cinders or other similar fragmentary
materials. The component parts are therefore hydraulic cement, sand and
the broken stone or other coarse material commonly designated as the
aggregate.


CEMENT.

At least a score of varieties of hydraulic cement are listed in the
classifications of cement technologists. The constructing engineer and
contractor recognize only three varieties: Portland cement, natural
cement and slag or puzzolan cement. All concrete used in engineering
work is made of either Portland, natural or slag cement, and the great
bulk of all concrete is made of Portland cement. Only these three
varieties of cement are, therefore, considered here and they only in
their aspects having relation to the economics of construction work. For
a full discussion of the chemical and physical properties of hydraulic
cements and for the methods of determining these properties by tests,
the reader is referred to "Practical Cement Testing," by W. Purves
Taylor.

~PORTLAND CEMENT.~--Portland cement is the best of the hydraulic cements.
Being made from a rigidly controlled artificial mixture of lime, silica
and alumina the product of the best mills is a remarkably strong,
uniform and stable material. It is suitable for all classes of concrete
work and is the only variety of hydraulic cement allowable for
reinforced concrete or for plain concrete having to endure hard wear or
to be used where strength, density and durability of high degree are
demanded.

~NATURAL CEMENT.~--Natural cement differs from Portland cement in degree
only. It is made by calcining and grinding a limestone rock containing
naturally enough clayey matter (silica and alumina) to make a cement
that will harden under water. Owing to the imperfection and irregularity
of the natural rock mixture, natural cement is weaker and less uniform
than Portland cement. Natural cement concrete is suitable for work in
which great unit strength or uniformity of quality is not essential. It
is never used for reinforced work.

~SLAG CEMENT.~--Slag cement has a strength approaching very closely that
of Portland cement, but as it will not stand exposure to the air slag
cement concrete is suitable for use only under water. Slag cement is
made by grinding together slaked lime and granulated blast furnace slag.

~SIZE AND WEIGHT OF BARRELS OF CEMENT.~--The commercial unit of
measurement of cement is the barrel; the unit of shipment is the bag. A
barrel of Portland cement contains 380 lbs. of cement, and the barrel
itself weighs 20 lbs.; there are four bags (cloth or paper sacks) of
cement to the barrel, and the regulation cloth sack weighs 1½ lbs.
The size of cement barrels varies, due to the differences in weight of
cement and to differences in compacting the cement into the barrel. A
light burned Portland cement weighs 100 lbs. per struck bushel; a heavy
burned Portland cement weighs 118 to 125 lbs. per struck bushel. The
number of cubic feet of packed Portland cement in a barrel ranges from 3
to 3½. Natural cements are lighter than Portland cement. A barrel of
Louisville, Akron, Utica or other Western natural cement contains 265
lbs. of cement and weighs 15 lbs. itself; a barrel of Rosendale or other
Eastern cement contains 300 lbs. of cement and the barrel itself weighs
20 lbs. There are 3-¾ cu. ft. in a barrel of Louisville cement. Usually
there are three bags to a barrel of natural cement.

As stated above, the usual shipping unit for cement is the bag, but
cement is often bought in barrels or, for large works, in bulk. When
bought in cloth bags, a charge is made of 10 cts. each for the bags,
but on return of the bags a credit of 8 to 10 cts. each is allowed.
Cement bought in barrels costs 10 cts. more per barrel than in bulk, and
cement ordered in paper bags costs 5 cts. more per barrel than in bulk.
Cement is usually bought in cloth sacks which are returned, but to get
the advantage of this method of purchase the user must have an accurate
system for preserving, checking up and shipping the bags.

Where any considerable amount of cement is to be used the contractor
will find that it will pay to erect a small bag house or to close off a
room at the mixing plant. Provide the enclosure with a locked door and
with a small window into which the bags are required to be thrown as
fast as emptied. One trustworthy man is given the key and the task of
counting up the empty bags each day to see that they check with the bags
of cement used. The following rule for packing and shipping is given by
Gilbreth.[A]

[Footnote A: "Field System," Frank B. Gilbreth. Myron C. Clark
Publishing Co., New York and Chicago.]

"Pack cement bags laid flat, one on top of the other, in piles of 50.
They can then be counted easily. Freight must be prepaid when cement
bags are returned and bills of lading must be obtained in duplicate or
credit cannot be obtained on shipment."

The volumes given above are for cement compacted in the barrel. When the
cement is emptied and shoveled into boxes it measures from 20 to 30 per
cent more than when packed in the barrel. The following table compiled
from tests made for the Boston Transit Commission, Mr. Howard Carson,
Chief Engineer, in 1896, shows the variation in volume of cement
measured loose and packed in barrels:

                                                      Per cent
Brand              Vol. Barrel   Vol. Packed   Vol. Loose   Increase
Portland.          cu. ft.         cu. ft.      cu. ft.     in bulk
  Giant              3.5            3.35         4.17        25
  Atlas              3.45           3.21         3.75        18
  Saylors            3.25           3.15         4.05        30
  Alsen              3.22           3.16         4.19        33
  Dyckerhoff         3.12           3.03         4.00        33

Mr. Clarence M. Foster is authority for the statement that Utica cement
barrels measure 16-1/4 ins. across at the heads, 19½ ins. across the
bilge, and 25-3/4 ins. in length under heads, and contain 3.77 cu. ft.
When 265 lbs. of Utica natural hydraulic cement are packed in a barrel
it fills it within 2½ ins. of the top and occupies 3.45 cu. ft., and
this is therefore the volume of a barrel of Utica hydraulic cement
packed tight.

In comparative tests made of the weights and volumes of various brands
of cements at Chicago in 1903, the following figures were secured:

                     Vol. per        Weight per     Weight per
                   bbl., cu. ft.     bbl., lbs.       cu. ft.
Brand.               Loose.          Gross.  Net.   Loose, lbs.
Dyckerhoff           4.47             395    369.5      83
Atlas                4.45             401    381        85.5
Alpha                4.37             400.5  381        86.5
Puzzolan             4.84             375    353.5      73.5
Steel                4.96             345    322.5      67.5
Hilton               4.64             393    370.5      79.5

~SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTING~--The great bulk of cement used in
construction work is bought on specification. The various government
bureaus, state and city works departments, railway companies, and most
public service corporations have their own specifications. Standard
specifications are also put forward by several of the national
engineering societies, and one of these or the personal specification of
the engineer is used for individual works. Buying cement to
specification necessitates testing to determine that the material
purchased meets the specified requirements. For a complete discussion of
the methods of conducting such tests the reader is referred to
"Practical Cement Testing" by W. Purves Taylor.

According to this authority a field testing laboratory will cost for
equipment $250 to $350. Such a laboratory can be operated by two or
three men at a salary charge of from $100 to $200 per month. Two men
will test on an average four samples per day and each additional man
will test four more samples. The cost of testing will range from $3 to
$5 per sample, which is roughly equivalent to 3 cts. per barrel of
cement, or from 3 to 5 cts. per cubic yard of concrete. These figures
are for field laboratory work reasonably well conducted under ordinarily
favorable conditions. In large laboratories the cost per sample will run
somewhat lower.


SAND.

Sand constitutes from 1/3 to 1/2 of the volume of concrete; when a large
amount of concrete is to be made a contractor cannot, therefore, afford
to guess at his source of sand supply. A long haul over poor roads can
easily make the sand cost more than the stone per cubic yard of
concrete.

~PROPERTIES OF GOOD SAND.~--Engineers commonly specify that sand for
concrete shall be clean and sharp, and silicious in character. Neither
sharpness nor excessive cleanliness is worth seeking after if it
involves much expense. Tests show conclusively that sand with rounded
grains makes quite as strong a mortar, other things being equal, as does
sand with angular grains. The admixture with sand of a considerable
percentage of loam or clay is also not the unmixed evil it has been
supposed to be. Myron S. Falk records[B] a number of elaborate
experiments on this point. These experiments demonstrate conclusively
that loam and clay in sand to the amount of 10 to 15 per cent. result in
no material reduction in the strength of mortars made with this sand as
compared with mortars made with the same sand after washing. There can
be no doubt but that for much concrete work the expense entailed in
washing sand is an unnecessary one.

[Footnote B: "Cements, Mortars and Concretes" By Myron S. Falk. Myron C.
Clark Publishing Co., Chicago, Ill.]

The only substitute for natural sand for concrete, that need be
considered practically, is pulverized stone, either the dust and fine
screenings produced in crushing rock or an artificial sand made by
reducing suitable rocks to powder. As a conclusion from the records of
numerous tests, M. S. Falk says: "It may be concluded that rock
screenings may be substituted for sand, either in mortar or concrete,
without any loss of strength resulting. This is important commercially,
for it precludes the necessity of screening the dust from crushed rock
and avoids, at the same time, the cost of procuring a natural sand to
take its place."

The principal danger in using stone dust is failure to secure the proper
balance of different size grains. This is also an important matter in
the choice of natural sands. Sand composed of a mixture of grains
ranging from fine to coarse gives uniformly stronger mortars than does
sand with grains of nearly one size, and as between a coarse and a fine
sand of one size of grains the coarse sand gives the stronger mortar.
Further data on the effect of size of grains on the utility of sand for
concrete are given in Chapter II, in the section on Voids in Sand, and
for those who wish to study in detail, the test data on this and the
other matters referred to here, the authors recommend "Cements, Mortars
and Concretes; Their Physical Properties," by Myron S. Falk.

~COST OF SAND.~--A very common price for sand in cities is $1 per cu. yd.,
delivered at the work. It may be noted here that as sand is often sold
by the load instead of the cubic yard, it is wise to have a written
agreement defining the size of a load. Where the contractor gets his
sand from the pit its cost will be the cost of excavating and loading at
the pit, the cost of hauling in wagons, the cost of freight and
rehandling it if necessary, and the cost of washing, added together.

An energetic man working under a good foreman will load 20 cu. yds. of
sand into wagons per 10-hour day; with a poor foreman or when laborers
are scarce, it is not safe to count on more than 15 cu. yds. per day.
With wages at $1.50 per day this will make the cost of loading 10 cts.
per cubic yard. The cost of hauling will include the cost of lost team
time and dumping, which will average about 5 cts. per cubic yard. With 1
cu. yd. loads, wages of team 35 cts. per hour, and speed of travel 2½
miles per hour, the cost of hauling proper is ½ ct. per 100 ft., or 27
cts. per mile. Assuming a mile haul, the cost of sand delivered based on
the above figures will be 10 cts. + 5 cts. + ½ ct. per 100 ft. = 15 +
27 cts. = 42 cts. per cu. yd. Freight rates can always be secured and it
is usually safe to estimate the weight on a basis of 2,700 lbs. per
cubic yard. For a full discussion of the cost of excavating sand and
other earths the reader is referred to "Earth Excavation and
Embankments; Methods and Cost," by Halbert P. Gillette and Daniel J.
Hauer.


~METHODS AND COST OF WASHING SAND.~--When the available sand carries
considerable percentages of loam or clay and the specifications require
that clean sand shall be used, washing is necessary. The best and
cheapest method of performing this task will depend upon the local
conditions and the amount of sand to be washed.

~Washing With Hose.~--When the quantity of sand to be washed does not
exceed 15 to 30 cu. yds. per day the simplest method, perhaps, is to use
a hose. Build a wooden tank or box, 8 ft. wide and 15 ft. long, the
bottom having a slope of 8 ins. in the 15 ft. The sides should be about
8 ins. high at the lower end and rise gradually to 3 ft. in height at
the upper end. Close the lower end of the tank with a board gate about 6
ins. in height and sliding in grooves so that it can be removed. Dump
about 3 cu. yds. of sand into the upper end of the tank and play a
¾-in. hose stream of water on it, the hose man standing at the lower
end of the tank. The water and sand flow down the inclined bottom of the
tank where the sand remains and the dirt flows over the gate and off
with the water. It takes about an hour to wash a 3-cu. yd. batch, and by
building a pair of tanks so that the hose man can shift from one to the
other, washing can proceed continuously and one man will wash 30 cu.
yds. per 10-hour day at a cost, with wages at $1.50, of 5 cts. per cubic
yard. The sand, of course, has to be shoveled from the tank and this
will cost about 10 cts. per cubic yard, making 15 cts. per cubic yard
for washing and shoveling, and to this must be added any extra hauling
and, if the water is pumped, the cost of pumping which may amount to 10
cts. per cubic yard for coal and wages. Altogether a cost of from 15 to
30 cts. per cubic yard may be figured for washing sand with a hose.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--Plan and Elevation of Two-Hopper Ejector Sand
Washing Plant.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--Plan and Elevation of Four-Hopper Ejector Sand
Washing-Plant.]

~Washing With Sand Ejectors.~--When large quantities of sand are to be
washed use may be made of the sand ejector system, commonly employed in
washing filter sand at large water filtration plants; water under
pressure is required. In this system the dirty sand is delivered into a
conical or pyramidal hopper, from the bottom of which it is drawn by an
ejector and delivered mixed with water into a second similar hopper;
here the water and dirt overflow the top of the hopper, while the sand
settles and is again ejected into a third hopper or to the stock pile or
bins. The system may consist of anywhere from two to six hoppers. Figure
1 shows a two-hopper lay-out and Fig. 2 shows a four-hopper lay-out. In
the first plant the washed sand is delivered into bins so arranged, as
will be seen, that the bins are virtually a third washing hopper. The
clean sand is chuted from these bins directly into cars or wagons. In
the second plant the clean sand is ejected into a trough which leads it
into buckets handled by a derrick. The details of one of the washing
hoppers for the plant shown by Fig. 1 are illustrated by Fig. 3.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Details of Washing Hopper and Ejector for Plant
Shown by Fig. 1.]

At filter plants the dirty sand is delivered mixed with water to the
first hopper by means of ejectors stationed in the filters and
discharging through pipes to the washers. When, as would usually be the
case in contract work, the sand is delivered comparatively dry to the
first hopper, this hopper must be provided with a sprinkler pipe to wet
the sand. In studying the ejector washing plants illustrated it should
be borne in mind that for concrete work they would not need to be of
such permanent construction as for filter plants, the washers would be
mounted on timber frames, underground piping would be done away with,
etc.; at best, however, such plants are expensive and will be warranted
only when the amount of sand to be washed is large.

The usual assumption of water-works engineers is that the volume of
water required for washing filter sand is 15 times the volume of the
sand washed. At the Albany, N. Y., filters the sand passes through five
ejectors at the rate of 3 to 5 cu. yds. per hour and takes 4,000
gallons of water per cubic yard. One man shovels sand into the washer
and two take it away. Based on an output of 32 cu. yds. in 10 hours, Mr.
Allen Hazen estimates the cost of washing as follows:

3 men, at $2 per day                    $6.00
110,000 gallons of water, at $0.05       5.50
                                       ------
Total, 32 cu. yds., at 36 cts.         $11.50

~Washing With Tank Washers.~--Figure 4 shows a sand washer used in
constructing a concrete lock at Springdale, Pa., in the United States
government improvement work on the Allegheny river. The device consisted
of a circular tank 9 ft. in diameter and 7 ft. high, provided with a
sloping false bottom perforated with 1-in. holes, through which water
was forced as indicated. A 7½×5×6-in. pump with a 3-in. discharge pipe
was used to force water into the tank, and the rotating paddles were
operated by a 7 h.p. engine. This apparatus washed a batch of 14 cu.
yds. in from 1 to 2 hours at a cost of 7 cts. per cubic yard. The sand
contained much fine coal and silt. The above data are given by Mr. W. H.
Roper.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Details of Tank Washer Used at Springdale, Pa.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--Details of Tank Washer Used at Yonkers, N. Y.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.--Details of Rotating Tank Sand Washer Used at
Hudson, N. Y.]

Another form of tank washer, designed by Mr. Allen Hazen, for washing
bank sand at Yonkers, N. Y., is shown by Fig. 5. This apparatus
consisted of a 10×2½×2½ ft. wooden box, with a 6-in. pipe entering one
end at the bottom and there branching into three 3-in. pipes, extending
along the bottom and capped at the ends. The undersides of the 3-in.
pipes were pierced with ½-in. holes 6 ins. apart, through which water
under pressure was discharged into the box. Sand was shoveled into the
box at one end and the upward currents of water raised the fine and
dirty particles until they escaped through the waste troughs. When the
box became filled with sand a sliding door at one end was opened and the
batch discharged. The operation was continuous as long as sand was
shoveled into the box; by manipulating the door the sand could be made
to run out with a very small percentage of water. Sand containing 7 per
cent of dirt was thus washed so that it contained only 0.6 per cent
dirt. The washer handled 200 cu. yds. of sand in 10 hours. The above
data are given by F. H. Stephenson.

A somewhat more elaborate form of tank washer than either of those
described is shown by Fig. 6. This apparatus was used by Mr. Geo. A.
Soper for washing filter sand at Hudson, N. Y. The dirty sand was
shoveled into a sort of hopper, from which it was fed by a hose stream
into an inclined cylinder, along which it traveled and was discharged
into a wooden trough provided with a screw conveyor and closed at both
ends. The water overflowing the sides of the trough carried away the
dirt and the clean sand was delivered by the screw to the bucket
elevator which hoisted it to a platform, from which it was taken by
barrows to the stock pile. A 4-h.p. engine with a 5-h.p. boiler operated
the cylinder, screw, elevator and pump. Four men operated the washer and
handled 32 cu. yds. of sand per day; with wages at $1.50 the cost of
washing was 20 cts. per cubic yard.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.--Arrangement of Sand Washing Plant at Lynchburg,
Va.]

In constructing a concrete block dam at Lynchburg, Va., sand containing
from 15 to 30 per cent. of loam, clay and vegetable matter was washed
to a cleanliness of 2 to 5 per cent of such matter by the device shown
by Fig. 7. A small creek was diverted, as shown, into a wooden flume
terminating in two sand tanks; by means of the swinging gate the flow
was passed through either tank as desired. The sand was hauled by wagon
and shoveled into the upper end of the flume; the current carried it
down into one of the tanks washing the dirt loose and carrying it off
with the overflow over the end of the tank while the sand settled in the
tank. When one tank was full the flow was diverted into the other tank
and the sand in the first tank was shoveled out, loaded into wagons, and
hauled to the stock pile. As built this washer handled about 30 cu. yds.
of sand per 10-hour day, but the tanks were built too small for the
flume, which could readily handle 75 cu. yds. per day with no larger
working force. This force consisted of three men at $1.50 per day,
making the cost, for a 30 cu. yd. output, 15 cts. per cu. yd. for
washing.

None of the figures given above includes the cost of handling the sand
to and from the washer. When this involves much extra loading and
hauling, it amounts to a considerable expense, and in any plan for
washing sand the contractor should figure, with exceeding care, the
extra handling due to the necessity of washing.


AGGREGATES.

The aggregates commonly used in making concrete are broken or crushed
stone, gravel, slag and cinders. Slag and cinders make a concrete that
weighs considerably less than stone or gravel mixtures, and being the
products of combustion are commonly supposed to make a specially fire
resisting concrete; their use is, therefore, confined very closely to
fireproof building work and, in fact, to floor construction for such
buildings. Slag and cinder concretes are for this reason given minor
consideration in this volume.

~BROKEN STONE.~--Stone produced by crushing any of the harder and tougher
varieties of rock is suitable for concrete. Perhaps the best stone is
produced by crushing trap rock. Crushed trap besides being hard and
tough is angular and has an excellent fracture surface for holding
cement; it also withstands heat better than most stone. Next to trap
the hard, tough, crystalline limestones make perhaps the best all around
concrete material; cement adheres to limestone better than to any other
rock. Limestone, however, calcines when subjected to fire and is,
therefore, objected to by many engineers for building construction. The
harder and denser sandstones, mica-schists, granites and syanites make
good stone for concrete and occasionally shale and slate may be used.

~GRAVEL.~--Gravel makes one of the best possible aggregates for concrete.
The conditions under which gravel is produced by nature make it
reasonably certain that only the tougher and harder rocks enter into its
composition; the rounded shapes of the component particles permit gravel
to be more closely tamped than broken stone and give less danger of
voids from bridging; the mixture is also generally a fairly well
balanced composition of fine and coarse particles. The surfaces of the
particles being generally smooth give perhaps a poorer bond with the
cement than most broken stone. In the matter of strength the most recent
tests show that there is very little choice between gravel and broken
stone concrete.

~SLAG AND CINDERS.~--The slag used for concrete aggregate is iron blast
furnace slag crushed to proper size. Cinders for aggregate are steam
boiler cinders; they are best with the fine ashes screened out and
should not contain more than 15 per cent. of unburned coal.

~BALANCED AGGREGATE.~--With the aggregate, as with the sand for concrete,
the best results, other things being equal, will be secured by using a
well-balanced mixture of coarse and fine particles. Usually the product
of a rock crusher is fairly well balanced except for the very fine
material. There is nearly always a deficiency of this, which, as
explained in a succeeding section, has to be supplied by adding sand.
Usually, also, the engineer accepts the crusher product coarser than
screenings as being well enough balanced for concrete work, but this is
not always the case. Engineers occasionally demand an artificial mixture
of varying proportions of different size stones and may even go so far
as to require gravel to be screened and reproportioned. This artificial
grading of the aggregate adds to the cost of the concrete in some
proportion which must be determined for each individual case.

~SIZE OF AGGREGATE.~--The size of aggregate to be used depends upon the
massiveness of the structure, its purpose, and whether or not it is
reinforced. It is seldom that aggregate larger than will pass a 3-in.
ring is used and this only in very massive work. The more usual size is
2½ ins. For reinforced concrete 1¼ ins. is about the maximum size
allowed and in building work 1-in. aggregate is most commonly used. Same
constructors use no aggregate larger than ¾ in. in reinforced building
work, and others require that for that portion of the concrete coming
directly in contact with the reinforcement the aggregate shall not
exceed ¼ to ½ in. The great bulk of concrete work is done with aggregate
smaller than 2 ins., and as a general thing where the massiveness of the
structure will allow of much larger sizes it will be more economic to
use rubble concrete. (See Chapter VI.)

~COST OF AGGREGATE.~--The locality in which the work is done determines
the cost of the aggregate. Concerns producing broken stone or screened
and washed gravel for concrete are to be found within shipping distance
in most sections of the country so that these materials may be purchased
in any amount desired. The cost will then be the market price of the
material f. o. b. cars at plant plus the freight rates and the cost of
unloading and haulage to the stock piles. If the contractor uses a local
stone or gravel the aggregate cost will be, for stone the costs of
quarrying and crushing and transportation, and, for gravel, the cost of
excavation, screening, washing and transportation.

~SCREENED OR CRUSHER-RUN STONE FOR CONCRETE.~--Formerly engineers almost
universally demanded that broken stone for concrete should have all the
finer particles screened out. This practice has been modified to some
considerable extent in recent years by using all the crusher product
both coarse and fine, or, as it is commonly expressed, by using
run-of-crusher stone. The comparative merits of screened and crusher-run
stone for concrete work are questions of comparative economy and
convenience. The fine stone dust and chips produced in crushing stone
are not, as was once thought, deleterious; they simply take the place of
so much of the sand which would, were the stone screened, be required to
balance the sand and stone mixture. It is seldom that the proportion of
chips and dust produced in crushing stone is large enough to replace the
sand constituent entirely; some sand has nearly always to be added to
run-of-crusher stone and it is in determining the amount of this
addition that uncertainty lies. The proportions of dust and chips in
crushed stone vary with the kind of stone and with the kind of crusher
used. Furthermore, when run-of-crusher stone is chuted from the crusher
into a bin or pile the screenings and the coarse stones segregate.
Examination of a crusher-run stone pile will show a cone-shaped heart of
fine material enclosed by a shell of coarser stone, consequently when
this pile of stone is taken from to make concrete a uniform mixture of
fine and coarse particles is not secured, the material taken from the
outside of the pile will be mostly coarse and that from the inside
mostly fine. This segregation combined with the natural variation in the
crusher product makes the task of adding sand and producing a balanced
sand and stone mixture one of extreme uncertainty and some difficulty
unless considerable expenditure is made in testing and reproportioning.
When the product of the crusher is screened the task of proportioning
the sand to the stone is a straightforward operation, and the screened
out chips and dust can be used as a portion of the sand if desired. The
only saving, then, in using crusher-run stone direct is the very small
one of not having to screen out the fine material. The conclusion must
be that the economy of unscreened stone for concrete is a very doubtful
quantity, and that the risk of irregularity in unscreened stone mixtures
is a serious one. The engineer's specifications will generally determine
for the contractor whether he is to use screened or crusher-run stone,
but these same specifications will not guarantee the regularity of the
resulting concrete mixture; this will be the contractor's burden and if
the engineer's inspection is rigid and the crusher-run product runs
uneven for the reasons given above it will be a burden of considerable
expense. The contractor will do well to know his product or to know his
man before bidding less or even as little on crusher-run as on screened
stone concrete.

~COST OF QUARRYING AND CRUSHING STONE.~--The following examples of the
cost of quarrying and crushing stone are fairly representative of the
conditions which would prevail on ordinary contract work. In quarrying
and crushing New Jersey trap rock with gyratory crushers the following
was the cost of producing 200 cu. yds. per day:

                                        Per day.  Per cu. yd.

  3 drillers at $2.75                     $ 8.25    $0.041
  3 helpers at $1.75                        5.25     0.026
 10 men barring out and sledging           15.00     0.075
 14 men loading carts                      21.00     0.105
  4 cart horses                             6.00     0.030
  2 cart drivers                            3.00     0.015
  2 men dumping carts and feeding crusher   3.00     0.015
  1 fireman for drill boiler                2.50     0.013
  1 engineman for crusher                   3.00     0.015
  1 blacksmith                              3.00     0.015
  1 blacksmith helper                       2.00     0.010
  1 foreman                                 5.00     0.025
  2 tons coal at $3.50                      7.00     0.035
150 lbs. 40% dynamite at 15 cts.           22.50     0.113
                                          ------   -------
      Total                              $106.50    $0.533

The quarry face worked was 12 to 18 ft., and the stone was crushed to
2-in. size. Owing to the seamy character of the rock it was broken by
blasting into comparatively small pieces requiring very little sledging.
The stone was loaded into one-horse dump carts, the driver taking one
cart to the crusher while the other was being loaded. The haul was 100
ft. The carts were dumped into an inclined chute leading to a No. 5
Gates crusher. The stone was elevated by a bucket elevator and screened.
All stone larger than 2 ins. was returned through a chute to a No. 3
Gates crusher for recrushing. The cost given above does not include
interest, depreciation, and repairs; these items would add about $8 to
$10 more per day or 4 to 5 cts. per cubic yard.

In quarrying limestone, where the face of the quarry was only 5 to 6 ft.
high, and where the amount of stripping was small, one steam drill was
used. This drill received its steam from the same boiler that supplied
the crusher engine. The drill averaged 60 ft. of hole drilled per 10-hr.
day, but was poorly handled and frequently laid off for repairs. The
cost of quarrying and crushing was as follows:

                          Quarry.
1 driller                                    $ 2.50
1 helper                                       1.50
1 man stripping                                1.50
4 men quarrying                                6.00
1 blacksmith                                   2.50
1/8 ton coal at $3                             1.00
Repairs to drill                                .60
Hose, drill steel and interest on plant         .90
24 lbs. dynamite                               3.60
                                             ------
Total                                        $20.10

                          Crusher.
1 engineman                                  $ 2.50
2 men feeding crusher                          3.50
6 men wheeling                                 9.00
1 bin man                                      1.50
1 general foreman                              3.00
1/3 ton coal at $3                             1.00
1 gallon oil                                    .25
Repairs to crusher                             1.00
Repairs to engine and boiler                   1.00
Interest on plant                              1.00
                                             ------
Total                                        $23.75

Summary:
                                     Per day. Per. cu. yd.

Quarrying                              $20.10   $0.37
Crushing                                23.75    0.39
                                       ------   -----
Total for 60 cu. yds.                  $43.85   $0.76

The "4 men quarrying" barred out and sledged the stone to sizes that
would enter a 9×16-in. jaw crusher. The "6 men wheeling" delivered the
stone in wheelbarrows to the crusher platform, the run plank being never
longer than 150 ft. Two men fed the stone into the crusher, and a
bin-man helped load the wagons from the bin, and kept tally of the
loads. The stone was measured loose in the wagons, and it was found that
the average load was 1½ cu. yds., weighing 2,400 lbs. per cu. yd. There
were 40 wagon loads, or 60 cu. yds. crushed per 10-hr. day, although on
some days as high as 75 cu. yds. were crushed. The stone was screened
through a rotary screen, 9 ft. long, having three sizes of openings,
½-in., 1¼-in. and 2¼-in. The output was 16% of the smallest size, 24% of
the middle size, and 60% of the large size. All tailings over 2½ ins. in
size were recrushed.

It will be noticed that the interest on the plant is quite an important
item. This is due to the fact that, year in and year out, a quarrying
and crushing plant seldom averages more than 100 days actually worked
per year, and the total charge for interest must be distributed over
these 100 days, and not over 300 days as is so commonly and erroneously
done. The cost of stripping the earth off the rock is often considerably
in excess of the above given cost, and each case must be estimated
separately. Quarry rental or royalty is usually not in excess of 5 cts.
per cu. yd., and frequently much less. The dynamite used was 40%, and
the cost of electric exploders is included in the cost given. Where a
higher quarry face is used the cost of drilling and the cost of
explosives per cu. yd. is less. Exclusive of quarry rent and heavy
stripping costs, a contractor should be able to quarry and crush
limestone or sandstone for not more than 75 cts. per cu. yd., or 62 cts.
per ton of 2,000 lbs., wages and conditions being as above given.

The labor cost of erecting bins and installing a 9×16 jaw crusher,
elevator, etc., averages about $75, including hauling the plant two or
three miles, and dismantling the plant when work is finished.

The following is a record of the cost of crushing stone and cobbles on
four jobs at Newton, Mass., in 1891. On jobs A and B the stone was
quarried and crushed; on jobs C and D cobblestones were crushed. A
9×15-in. Farrel-Marsondon crusher was used, stone being fed in by two
laborers. A rotary screen having ½, 1 and 2½-in. openings delivered the
stone into bins having four compartments, the last receiving the
"tailings" which had failed to pass through the screen. The broken stone
was measured in carts as they left the bin, but several cart loads were
weighed, giving the following weights per cubic foot of broken stone:

                               -----------Size.--------------

                               ½-in.  1-in. 2½-ins. Tailings.
                                lbs.   lbs.   lbs.     lbs.
Greenish trap rock, "A"         95.8   84.3   88.3     91.0
Conglomerate, "B"              101.0   87.7   94.4     ....
Cobblestones, "C" and "D"      102.5   98.0   99.6     ....

A one-horse cart held 26 to 28 cu. ft. (average 1 cu. yd.) of broken
stone; a two-horse cart, 40 to 42 cu. ft., at the crusher.

                               ---------------------Job.-------------

                                            A.     B.      C.      D.
Hours run                                  412    144     101     198
Short tons per hour                        9.0   11.2    15.7    12.1
Cu. yds. per hour                          7.7    8.9    11.8     9.0
Per cent of tailings                      31.8   29.3    17.5    20.5
Per cent of 2½-in. stone                  51.3   51.9    57.0    55.1
Per cent of 1-in. stone                   10.2   ....    ....    ....
Per cent of ½-in. stone or dust            6.7   18.8    25.5    23.4


                               ---------------------Job.-------------

                                           A.      B.     C.      D.
Explosives, coal for drill and repairs $0.084  $0.018    ....    ....
Labor steam drilling                    0.092    ....    ....    ....
Labor hand drilling                      ....   0.249    ....    ....
Sharpening tools                        0.069   0.023    ....    ....
Sledging stone for crusher              0.279   0.420    ....    ....
Loading carts                           0.098   0.127    ....  $0.144
Carting to crusher                      0.072   0.062  $0.314   0.098
Feeding crusher                         0.053   0.053   0.033   0.065
Engineer of crusher                     0.031   0.038   0.029   0.036
Coal for crusher                        0.079   0.050   0.047   0.044
Repairs to crusher                      0.041    ....    ....   0.011
Moving portable crusher                  ....   0.023    ....   0.019
Watchman ($1.75 a day)                   ....   0.053   0.022   0.030
                                       ------  ------  ------  ------
Total cost per cu. yd.                 $0.898  $1.116  $0.445  $0.447
Total cost per short ton                0.745   0.885   0.330   0.372

     Note.--"A" was trap rock; "B" was conglomerate rock; "C" and
     "D" were trap and granite cobblestones. Common laborers on jobs
     "A" and "D" were paid $1.75 per 9-hr. day; on jobs "B" and "C,"
     $1.50 per 9-hr. day; two-horse cart and driver, $5 per day;
     blacksmith, $2.50; engineer on crusher, $2 on job "A," $2.25 on
     "B," $2.00 on "C," $2.50 on "D"; steam driller received $3, and
     helper $1.75 a day; foreman, $3 a day. Coal was $5.25 per short
     ton. Forcite powder, 11-1/3 cts. per lb.

For a full discussion of quarrying and crushing methods and costs and
for descriptions of crushing machinery and plants the reader is referred
to "Rock Excavation; Methods and Cost," by Halbert P. Gillette.


~SCREENING AND WASHING GRAVEL.~--Handwork is resorted to in screening
gravel only when the amount to be screened is small and when it is
simply required to separate the fine sand without sorting the coarser
material into sizes. The gravel is shoveled against a portable inclined
screen through which the sand drops while the pebbles slide down and
accumulate at the bottom. The cost of screening by hand is the cost of
shoveling the gravel against the screen divided by the number of cubic
yards of saved material. In screening gravel for sand the richer the
gravel is in fine material the cheaper will be the cost per cubic yard
for screening; on the contrary in screening gravel for the pebbles the
less sand there is in the gravel the cheaper will be the cost per cubic
yard for screening. The cost of shoveling divided by the number of cubic
yards shoveled is the cost of screening only when both the sand and the
coarser material are saved. Tests made in the pit will enable the
contractor to estimate how many cubic yards of gravel must be shoveled
to get a cubic yard of sand or pebbles. An energetic man will shovel
about 25 cu. yds. of gravel against a screen per 10-hour day and keep
the screened material cleared away, providing no carrying is necessary.

A mechanical arrangement capable of handling a considerably larger
yardage of material is shown by Fig. 8. Two men and a team are required.
The team is attached to the scraper by means of the rope passing through
the pulley at the top of the incline. The scraper is loaded in the usual
manner, hauled up the incline until its wheels are stopped by blocks and
then the team is backed up to slacken the rope and permit the scraper to
tip and dump its load. The trip holding the scraper while dumping is
operated from the ground. The scraper load falls onto an inclined
screen which takes out the sand and delivers the pebbles into the wagon.
By erecting bins to catch the sand and pebbles this same arrangement
could be made continuous in operation.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.--Device for Excavating and Screening Gravel and
Loading Wagons.]

[Illustration: Fig. 9.--Gravel Washing Plant of 120 to 130 Cu. Yds., Per
Hour Capacity.]

In commercial gravel mining, the gravel is usually sorted into several
sizes and generally it is washed as well as screened. Where the pebbles
run into larger sizes a crushing plant is also usually installed to
reduce the large stones. Works producing several hundred cubic yards of
screened and washed gravel per day require a plant of larger size and
greater cost than even a very large piece of concrete work will warrant,
so that only general mention will be made here of such plants. The
commercial sizes of gravel are usually 2-in., 1-in., ½-in. and ¼-in.,
down to sand. No very detailed costs of producing gravel by these
commercial plants are available. At the plant of the Lake Shore &
Michigan Southern Ry., where gravel is screened and washed for ballast,
the gravel is passed over a 2-in., a ¾-in., a ¼-in. and a 1/8-in. screen
in turn and the fine sand is saved. About 2,000 tons are handled per
day; the washed gravel, 2-in. to 1/8-in. sizes, represents from 40 to 65
per cent. of the raw gravel and costs from 23 to 30 cts. per cu. yd.,
for excavation, screening and washing. The drawings of Fig. 9 show a
gravel washing plant having a capacity of 120 to 130 cu. yds. per hour,
operated by the Stewart-Peck Sand Co., of Kansas City, Mo. Where washing
alone is necessary a plant of one or two washer units like those here
shown could be installed without excessive cost by a contractor at any
point where water is available. Each washer unit consists of two
hexagonal troughs 18 ins. in diameter and 18 ft. long. A shaft carrying
blades set spirally is rotated in each trough to agitate the gravel and
force it along; each trough also has a fall of 6 ins. toward its
receiving end. The two troughs are inclosed in a tank or box and above
and between them is a 5-in. pipe having ¾-in. holes 3 ins. apart so
arranged that the streams are directed into the troughs. The water and
dirt pass off at the lower end of the troughs while the gravel is fed by
the screws into a chute discharging into a bucket elevator, which in
turn feeds into a storage bin. The gravel to be washed runs from 2 ins.
to 1/8-in. in size; it is excavated by steam shovel and loaded into 1½
cu. yd. dump cars, three of which are hauled by a mule to the washers,
where the load is dumped into the troughs. The plant having a capacity
of 120 to 130 cu. yds. per hour cost $25,000, including pump and an
8-in. pipe line a mile long. A 100-hp. engine operates the plant, and 20
men are needed for all purposes. This plant produces washed gravel at a
profit for 40 cts. per cu. yd.




CHAPTER II.

THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PROPORTIONING CONCRETE.


American engineers proportion concrete mixtures by measure, thus a 1-3-5
concrete is one composed of 1 volume of cement, 3 volumes of sand and 5
volumes of aggregate. In Continental Europe concrete is commonly
proportioned by weight and there have been prominent advocates of this
practice among American engineers. It is not evident how such a change
in prevailing American practice would be of practical advantage. Aside
from the fact that it is seldom convenient to weigh the ingredients of
each batch, sand, stone and gravel are by no means constant in specific
gravity, so that the greater exactness of proportioning by weight is not
apparent. In this volume only incidental attention is given to
gravimetric methods of proportioning concrete.

~VOIDS.~--Both the sand and the aggregates employed for concrete contain
voids. The amount of this void space depends upon a number of
conditions. As the task of proportioning concrete consists in so
proportioning the several materials that all void spaces are filled with
finer material the conditions influencing the proportion of voids in
sand and aggregates must be known.

~Voids in Sand.~--The two conditions exerting the greatest influence on
the proportion of voids in sand are the presence of moisture and the
size of the grains of which the sand is composed.


TABLE I.--SHOWING EFFECT OF ADDITIONS OF DIFFERENT PERCENTAGES OF
MOISTURE ON VOLUME OF SAND.

Per cent of water in sand       0    0.5    1     2     3     5     10
Weight per cu. yd. of fine     Lbs.  Lbs.  Lbs.  Lbs.  Lbs.  Lbs.  Lbs.
sand and water                3,457 2,206 2,085 2,044 2,037 2,035 2,133
Weight per cu. yd. of coarse
sand and water                2,551 2,466 2,380 2,122 2,058 2,070 2,200

The volume of sand is greatly affected by the presence of varying
percentages of moisture in the sand. A dry loose sand that has 45 per
cent. voids if mixed with 5 per cent. by weight of water will swell,
unless tamped, to such an extent that its voids may be 57 per cent. The
same sand if saturated with water until it becomes a thin paste may show
only 37½ per cent. voids after the sand has settled. Table I shows the
results of tests made by Feret, the French experimenter. Two kinds of
sand were used, a very fine sand and a coarse sand. They were measured
in a box that held 2 cu. ft. and was 8 ins. deep, the sand being
shoveled into the box but not tamped or shaken. After measuring and
weighing the dry sand 0.5 per cent. by weight of water was added and the
sand was mixed and shoveled back into the box again and then weighed.
These operations were repeated with varying percentages of water up to
10 per cent. It will be noted that the weight of mixed water and sand is
given; to ascertain the exact weight of dry sand in any mixture, divide
the weight given in the table by 100 per cent. plus the given tabular
per cent.; thus the weight of dry, fine sand in a 5 per cent. mixture is
2,035 ÷ 1.5 = 1,98 lbs. per cu. yd. The voids in the dry sand were 45
per cent. and in the sand with 5 per cent. moisture they were 56.7 per
cent. Pouring water onto loose, dry sand compacts it. By mixing fine
sand and water to a thin paste and allowing it to settle, it was found
that the sand occupied 11 per cent. less space than when measured dry.
The voids in fine sand, having a specific gravity of 2.65, were
determined by measurement in a quart measure and found to be as follows:

Sand not packed, per cent. voids                     44½
Sand shaken to refusal, per cent. voids              35
Sand saturated with water, per cent. voids           37½

Another series of tests made by Mr. H. P. Boardman, using Chicago sand
having 34 to 40 per cent. voids, showed the following results:

Water added, per cent.           2      4    6      8     10
Resulting per cent. increase    17.6   22   19.5   16.6   15.6

Mr. Wm. B. Fuller found by tests that a dry sand, having 34 per cent.
voids, shrunk 9.6 per cent. in volume upon thorough tamping until it had
27 per cent. voids. The same sand moistened with 6 per cent. water and
loose had 44 per cent. voids, which was reduced to 31 per cent. by
ramming. The same sand saturated with water had 33 per cent. voids and
by thorough ramming its volume was reduced 8½ per cent. until the sand
had only 26¼ per cent. voids. Further experiments might be quoted and
will be found recorded in several general treatises on concrete, but
these are enough to demonstrate conclusively that any theory of the
quantity of cement in mortar to be correct must take into account the
effect of moisture on the voids in sand.

The effect of the size and the shape of the component grains on the
amount of voids in sand is considerable. Feret's experiments are
conclusive on these points, and they alone will be followed here. Taking
for convenience three sizes of sand Feret mixed them in all the varying
proportions possible with a total of 10 parts; there were 66 mixtures.
The sizes used were: Large (L), sand composed of grains passing a
sieve of 5 meshes per linear inch and retained on a sieve of 15 meshes
per linear inch; medium (M>), sand passing a sieve of 15 meshes and
retained on a sieve of 50 meshes per linear inch, and fine (F), sand
passing a 50-mesh sieve. With a dry sand whose grains have a specific
gravity of 2.65, the weight of a cubic yard of either the fine, or the
medium, or the large size, was 2,190 lbs., which is equivalent to 51 per
cent. voids. The greatest weight of mixture, 2,840 lbs. per cu. yd., was
an L_{6}M_{0}F_{4} mixture, that is, one composed of six parts
large, no parts medium and 4 parts fine; this mixture was the densest of
the 66 mixtures made, having 36 per cent. voids. It will be noted that
the common opinion that the densest mixture is obtained by a mixture of
gradually increasing sizes of grains is incorrect; there must be enough
difference in the size of the grains to provide voids so large that the
smaller grains will enter them and not wedge the larger grains apart.
Turning now to the shape of the grains, the tests showed that rounded
grains give less voids than angular grains. Using sand having a
composition of L_{5}M_{3}F_{2} Feret got the following results:

                                     --Per cent. Voids--
Kind of Grains.                       Shaken.     Unshaken.
Natural sand, rounded grains           25.6        35.9
Crushed quartzite, angular grains      27.4        42.1
Crushed shells, flat grains            31.8        44.3
Residue of quartzite, flat grains      34.6        47.5

The sand was shaken until no further settlement occurred. It is plain
from these data on the effect of size and shape of grains on voids why
it is that discrepancies exist in the published data on voids in dry
sand. An idea of the wide variation in the granulometric composition of
different sands is given by Table II. Table III shows the voids as
determined for sands from different localities in the United States.


TABLE II.--SHOWING GRANULOMETRIC COMPOSITIONS OF DIFFERENT SANDS.

   Held by a Sieve.        A       B        C        E
No.  10                  35.3%
No.  20                  32.1    12.8%     4.2%     11%
No.  30                  14.6    49.0     12.5      14
No.  40                   ...     ...     44.4     ...
No.  50                   9.6    29.3      ...      53
No. 100                   4.9     5.7      ...     ...
No. 200                   2.0     2.3      ...     ...
                        -----   -----    -----     -----
Voids                    33%     39%      41.7%     31%

     NOTE.--A, is a "fine gravel" (containing 8% clay) used at
     Philadelphia. B, Delaware River sand. C, St. Mary's River sand.
     D, Green River, Ky., sand, "clean and sharp."


TABLE III.--SHOWING MEASURED VOIDS IN SAND FROM DIFFERENT LOCALITIES.

                                              Percent
 Locality.                  Authority.         Voids.     Remarks.

Ohio River                  W. M. Hall          31         Washed
Sandusky, O.                C. E. Sherman       40         Lake
Franklin Co., O.            C. E. Sherman       40         Bank
Sandusky Bay, O.            S. B. Newberry     32.3       ......
St. Louis, Mo.              H. H. Henby        34.3       Miss. River
Sault Ste. Marie            H. von Schon       41.7       River
Chicago, Ill.               H. P. Broadman   34 to 40     ......
Philadelphia, Pa                                39         Del. River
Mass. Coast                                  31 to 34     ......
Boston, Mass                Geo. Kimball        33         Clean
Cow Bay, L. I.              Myron S. Falk       40½       ......
Little Falls, N. J.         W. B. Fuller       45.6       ......
Canton, Ill.                G. W. Chandler      30         Clean

~Voids in Broken Stone and Gravel.~--The percentage of voids in broken
stone varies with the nature of the stone: whether it is broken by hand
or by crushers; with the kind of crusher used, and upon whether it is
screened or crusher-run product. The voids in broken stone seldom
exceed 52 per cent. even when the fragments are of uniform size and the
stone is shoveled loose into the measuring box. The following records of
actual determinations of voids in broken stone cover a sufficiently wide
range of conditions to show about the limits of variation.

The following are results of tests made by Mr. A. N. Johnson, State
Engineer of Illinois, to determine the variation in voids in crushed
stone due to variation in size and to method of loading into the
measuring box. The percentage of voids was determined by weighing the
amount of water added to fill the box:

           Method of          Per cent.
Size.      Loading.           of Voids.
3  in.     20-ft. drop          41.8
3  in.     15-ft drop           46.8
3  in.     15-ft. drop          47.2
3  in.     Shovels              48.7
1½ in.     20-ft. drop          42.5
1½ in.     15-ft. drop          46.8
1½ in.     15-ft. drop          46.8
1½ in.     Shovels              50.5
 ¾ in.     20-ft. drop          39.4
 ¾ in.     15-ft. drop          42.7
 ¾ in.     15-ft. drop          41.5
 ¾ in.     15-ft. drop          41.8
 ¾ in.     Shovels              45.2
 ¾ in.     Shovels              44.6
3/8 in.    Shovels              41.0
3/8 in.    Shovels              40.6
3/8 in.    Shovels              41.0

The table shows clearly the effect on voids of compacting the stone by
dropping it; it also shows for the ¾-in. and the 3/8-in. stone loaded by
shovels how uniformly the percentages of voids run for stone of one size
only. Dropping the stone 20 ft. reduced the voids some 12 to 15 per
cent. as compared with shoveling.


TABLE IV.--SHOWING DETERMINED PERCENTAGES OF VOIDS IN BROKEN STONE FROM
VARIOUS COMMON ROCKS.

--------------------+--------+------------------------------------------------
                    | Percent|
     Authority.     |  Voids.|                Remarks.
--------------------+--------+------------------------------------------------
Sabin               |  49.0  | Limestone, crusher run after screening out
                    |        |   1/8-in. and under.
  "                 |  44.0  | Limsetone (1 part screenings mixed with
                    |        |   6 parts broken stone).
Wm. M. Black        |  46.5  | Screened and washed, 2-ins. and under.
J. J. R. Croes      |  47.5  | Gneiss, after screening out ¼-in. and under.
S. B. Newberry      |  47.0  | Chiefly about egg size.
H. P. Broadman      |39 to 42| Chicago limestone, crusher run.
        "           |48 to 52|    "       "       screened into sizes.
Wm. M. Hall         |  48.0  | Green River limestone, 2½-ins. and smaller
                    |        |   dust screened out.
   "                |  50.0  | Hudson River trap, 2½-ins. and smaller,
                    |        |   dust screened out.
Wm. B. Fuller       |  47.6  | New Jersey trap, crusher run, 1/6 to 2.1 in.
Geo. A. Kimball     |  49.5  | Roxbury conglomerate, ½ to 2½ ins.
Myron S. Falk       |  48.0  | Limestone, ½ to 3 ins.
W. H. Henby         |  43.0  |     "      2-in size.
   "                |  46.0  |     "      1½-in size
Feret               |  53.4  | Stone, 1.6 to 2.4 ins.
  "                 |  51.7  |   "    0.8 to 1.6 in.
  "                 |  52.1  |   "    0.4 to 0.8 in.
A. W. Dow           |  45.3  | Bluestone, 89% being 1½ to 2½ ins.
   "                |  45.3  |     "      90% being 1/6 to 1½ in.
Taylor and Thompson |  54.5  | Trap, hard, 1 to 2½ ins.
    "               |  54.5  |   "    "    ½ to 1 in.
    "               |  45.0  |   "    "    0 to 2½ in.
       "            |  51.2  |   "   soft, ¾ to 2 ins.
G. W. Chandler      |  40.0  | Canton, Ill.
Emile Low           |  39.0  | Buffalo limestone, crusher run, dust in.
C. M. Saville       |  46.0  | Crushed cobblestone, screened into sizes.
--------------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------


TABLE V.--SHOWING PERCENTAGES OF VOIDS IN GRAVEL AND BROKEN STONE OF
DIFFERENT GRANULOMETRIC COMPOSITIONS.

                                       /--Per cent Voids in--\
Passing a ring of   2.4"   1.6"  0.8"   Round        Broken
Held by a ring      1.6"   0.8"  0.4"   Pebbles.     Stone.
  Parts              1      0     0      40.0         53.4
    "                0      1     0      38.8         51.7
    "                0      0     1      41.7         52.1
    "                1      1     0      35.8         50.5
    "                1      0     1      35.6         47.1
    "                0      1     1      37.9         40.5
    "                1      1     1      35.5         47.8
    "                4      1     1      34.5         49.2
    "                1      4     1      36.6         49.4
    "                1      1     4      38.1         48.6
    "                8      0     2      34.1         ....

Table IV gives the voids in broken stone as determined by various
engineers; it requires no explanation. Table V, taken from Feret's
tests, shows the effect of changes in granulometric composition on the
amount of voids in both broken stone and gravel. Considering the column
giving voids in stone it is to be noted first how nearly equal the voids
are for stone of uniform size whatever that size be. As was the case
with sand a mixture of coarse and fine particles gives the fewest voids;
for stone an L_{1}M_{0}F_{1} mixture and for gravel an L_{8}M_{0}F_{2}
mixture. Tamping reduces the voids in broken stone. Mr. Geo. W. Rafter
gives the voids in clean, hand-broken limestone passing a 2½-in. ring as
43 per cent. after being lightly shaken and 37½ per cent. after being
rammed. Generally speaking heavy ramming will reduce the voids in loose
stone about 20 per cent.

It is rare that gravel has less than 30 per cent. or more than 45 per
cent. voids. If the pebbles vary considerably in size so that the small
fit in between the large, the voids may be as low as 30 per cent. but if
the pebbles are tolerably uniform in size the voids will approach 45 per
cent. Table V shows the effect of granulometric composition on the voids
in gravel as determined by Feret. Mr. H. Von Schon gives the following
granulometric analysis of a gravel having 34.1 per cent. voids:

Retained on 1-in. ring, per cent.          10.70
Retained on 3/8-in. ring, per cent.        23.65
Retained on No. 4 sieve, per cent.          8.70
Retained on No. 10 sieve, per cent.        17.14
Retained on No. 20 sieve, per cent.        21.76
Retained on No. 30 sieve, per cent.         6.49
Retained on No. 40 sieve, per cent.         5.96
Passed a No. 40 sieve, per cent.            5.59
Passed a 1½-in ring, per cent.            100.00

As mixtures of broken stone and gravel are often used the following
determinations of voids in such mixtures are given. The following
determinations were made by Mr. Wm. M. Hall for mixtures of blue
limestone and Ohio River washed gravel:

Per cent.         Per cent.   Per cent.
 Stone.            Gravel.  Voids in Mix

  100     with        0          48
   80      "         20          44
   70      "         30          41
   60      "         40          38½
   50      "         50          36
    0      "        100          35

The dust was screened from the stone all of which passed a 2½-in. ring;
the gravel all passed a 1½-in. screen. Using the same sizes of gravel
and Hudson River trap rock, the results were:

Per cent.     Per cent.           Per cent.
 Trap.         Gravel.          Voids in Mix.

  100    with     0                  50
   60     "      40                  38½
   50     "      50                  36
    0     "     100                  35

The weight of a cubic foot of loose gravel or stone is not an accurate
index of the percentage of voids unless the specific gravity is known.
Pure quartz weighs 165 lbs., per cu. ft., hence broken quartz having 40
per cent. voids weighs 165 × .60 = 99 lbs. per cu. ft. Few gravels are
entirely quartz, and many contain stone having a greater specific
gravity like some traps or a less specific gravity like some shales and
sandstone. Tables VI and VII give the specific gravities of common
stones and minerals and Table VIII gives the weights corresponding to
different percentages of voids for different specific gravities.


TABLE VI.--SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF STONE. (Condensed from Merrill's "Stones
for Building.")

Trap, Boston, Mass.                            2.78
  "   Duluth, Minn.                     2.8 to 3.0
  "   Jersey City, N. J.                       3.03
  "   Staten Island, N. Y.                     2.86
Gneiss, Madison Ave., N. Y.                    2.92
Granite, New London, Conn.                     2.66
   "     Greenwich, Conn.                      2.84
   "     Vinalhaven, Me.                       2.66
   "     Quincy, Mass.                         2.66
   "     Barre, Vt.                            2.65
Limestone, Joliet, Ill.                        2.56
    "      Quincy, Ill.                2.51 to 2.57
 Limestone, (oolitic) Bedford, Ind.    2.25 to 2.45
     "      Marquette, Mich.                   2.34
     "      Glens Falls, N.Y.                  2.70
     "      Lake Champlain, N. Y.              2.75
 Sandstone, Portland, Conn.                    2.64
     "      Haverstraw, N. Y.                  2.13
     "      Medina, N. Y.                      2.41
     "      Potsdam, N. Y.                     2.60
     "      (grit) Berea, O.                   2.12


TABLE VII.--SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF COMMON MINERALS AND ROCKS.

Apatite                            2.92-3.25
Basalt                             3.01
Calcite, CaCO_{3}                  2.5-2.73
Cassiterite, SnO_{2}               6.4-7.1
Cerrusite, PbCO_{3}                6.46-6.48
Chalcopyrite, CuFeS_{2}            4.1-4.3
Coal, anthracite                   1.3-1.84
Coal, bituminous                   1.2-1.5
Diabase                            2.6-3.03
Diorite                            2.92
Dolomite, CaMg (CO_{3})²           2.8-2.9
Felspar                            2.44-2.78
Felsite                            2.65
Galena, Pbs                        7.25-7.77
Garnet                             3.15-4.31
Gneiss                             2.62-2.92
Granite                            2.55-2.86
Gypsum                             2.3-3.28
Halite (salt) NaCl                 2.1-2.56
Hematite, Fe_{2}O_{3}              4.5-5.3
Hornblende                         3.05-3.47
Limonite, Fe_{3}O_{4} (OH)^{6}     3.6-4.0
Limestone                          2.35-2.87
Magnetite, Fe_{3}O_{4}             4.9-5.2
Marble                             2.08-2.85
Mica                               2.75-3.1
Mica Schist                        2.5-2.9
Olivine                            3.33-3.5
Porphyry                           2.5-2.6
Pyrite, FeS_{2}                    4.83-5.2
Quartz, SiO_{2}                    2.5-2.8
Quartzite                          2.6-2.7
Sandstone                          2.0-2.78
    "     Medina                   2.4
    "     Ohio                     2.2
    "     Slaty                    1.82
Shale                              2.4-2.8
Slate                              2.5-2.8
Sphalerite, ZnS                    3.9-4.2
Stibnite, Sb_{2}S_{3}              4.5-4.6
Syenite                            2.27-2.65
Talc                               2.56-2.8
Trap                               2.6-3.0


TABLE VIII.--SHOWING WEIGHT OF STONE WITH DIFFERENT PERCENTAGES OF VOIDS
FOR DIFFERENT SPECIFIC GRAVITIES.

         Weight    Weight
         in Lbs.   in Lbs.         Weight in Lbs. per cu. yd.
Specific per       per                 when Voids are
Gravity. cu. ft.   cu. yd.   30%      35%      40%      45%      50%

  1.0     62.355   1,684    1,178    1,094    1,010      926      842
  2.0    124.7     3,367    2,357    2,187    2,020    1,852    1,684
  2.1    130.9     3,536    2,475    2,298    2,121    1,945    1,768
  2.2    137.2     3,704    2,593    2,408    2,222    2,037    1,852
  2.3    143.4     3,872    2,711    2,517    2,323    2,130    1,936
  2.4    149.7     4,041    2,828    2,626    2,424    2,222    2,020
  2.5    155.9     4,209    2,946    2,736    2,525    2,315    2,105
  2.6    162.1     4,377    3,064    2,845    2,626    2,408    2,189
  2.7    168.4     4,546    3,182    2,955    2,727    2,500    2,273
  2.8    174.6     4,714    3,300    3,064    2,828    2,593    2,357
  2.9    180.9     4,882    3,418    3,174    2,929    2,685    2,441
  3.0    187.1     5,051    3,536    3,283    3,030    2,778    2,526
  3.1    193.3     5,219    3,653    3,392    3,131    2,871    2,609
  3.2    199.5     5,388    3,771    3,502    3,232    2,963    2,694
  3.3    205.8     5,556    3,889    3,611    3,333    3,056    2,778
  3.4    212.0     5,724    4,007    3,721    3,434    3,148    2,862
  3.5    218.3     5,893    4,125    3,830    3,535    3,241    2,947

In buying broken stone by the cubic yard it should be remembered that
hauling in a wagon compacts the stone by shaking it down and reduces the
volume. Table IX shows the results of tests made by the Illinois Highway
Commission to determine the settlement of crushed stone in wagon loads
for different lengths of haul. The road over which the tests were made
was a macadam road, not particularly smooth, but might be considered as
an average road surface. The wagon used was one with a dump bottom
supported by chains, which were drawn as tight as possible, so as to
reduce the sag to a minimum. It will be noticed that about 50 per cent.
of the settlement occurs within the first 100 ft., and 75 per cent. of
the settlement in the first 200 ft. Almost all of the settlement occurs
during the first half mile, as the tests showed practically no
additional settlement for distances beyond. Some of the wagons were
loaded from the ground with shovels, others were loaded from bins, the
stone having a 15-ft. drop, which compacted the stone a little more than
where loaded with shovels, so that there was somewhat less settlement.
But at the end of a half mile the density was practically the same,
whatever the method of loading. The density at the beginning and at the
end of the haul can be compared by the weight of a given volume of
crushed stone. For convenience, the weight of a cubic yard of the
material at the beginning of the haul and at the end was computed from
the known contents of a wagon.


TABLE IX.--SHOWING SETTLEMENT OF BROKEN STONE DUE TO DIFFERENT LENGTHS
OF HAUL ON ORDINARILY GOOD ROAD IN WAGONS.

[Transcriber's Note: Table split]

-----------+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
  Size.    |  Method of |                                                   |
           |   Loading. |      Per cent Settlement for Hauling.             |
           |            +---------------------------------------------------+
           |            |100'|200'|300'|400'|500'|600'|700'|½ Mile|1 Mile   |
-----------+------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+------+---------+
Screenings |15 ft. drop |....| ...|....|....|....|....|....| 11.5 | 11.5    |
Screenings |15 ft. drop |....| ...|....|....|....|....|....| 12.6 | 12.6    |
Screenings |15 ft. drop | 7.3| 8.3| 8.9| 9.2| 9.5|10.1|10.1| 11.2 | ....    |
Screenings |15 ft. drop | 5.0| 9.6|10.2|10.2|10.4|10.4|10.4| 12.4 | ....    |
           |            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |      |         |
===========+============+====+====+====+====+====+====+====+======+=========+
1½ inch    |15 ft. drop | ...|....|....|....|....|....|....| 11.5 | 11.5[C] |
1½ inch    |15 ft. drop | 5.3| 6.2| 7.1| 7.7| 7.9| 8.0| 8.3|  9.2 | ....    |
1½ inch    |15 ft. drop | 2.6| 3.7| 4.9| 5.3| 5.3| 5.3| 5.4|  5.4 | ....    |
1½ inch    |Shovels     | 3.5| 4.1| 4.8| 5.3| 5.3| 5.7| 6.5|  7.25| ....    |
1½ inch    |Shovels     | ...|....|....|....|....|....|....| 12.6 | 12.6    |
===========+============+====+====+====+====+====+====+====+======+=========+
3 inch     |15 ft. drop | ...|....|....|....|....|....|....| 10.1 | 10.1    |
3 inch     |15 ft. drop | 3.5| 4.2| 4.5| 4.8| 5.0| 5.0| 5.0|  6.0 | ....    |
3 inch     |15 ft. drop | 0.5| 2.5| 2.5| 4.1| 4.3| 4.3| 4.3|  4.9 | ....    |
3 inch     |Shovels     | ...|....|....|....|....|....|....| 12.6 | 12.6    |
3 inch     |Shovels     | 5.0| 5.6| 6.5| 6.5| 6.8| 6.8| 6.8|  7.1 | ....    |
------------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+------+---------+
   [Footnote C: Same per cent of settlement for two-mile haul.]

-----------+------------+-----------------
  Size.    |  Method of |  Weight per
           |   Loading. |  Cu. Yd. in Lbs.
           |            +-----------------
           |            | At    | At
           |            | start.| finish.
-----------+------------+-------+-------
Screenings |15 ft. drop | 2,518 | 2,840
Screenings |15 ft. drop | 2,518 | 2,886
Screenings |15 ft. drop | 2,450 | 2,770
Screenings |15 ft. drop | 2,425 | 2,780
===========+============+=======+========
           |            |       |
1½ inch    |15 ft. drop | 2,305 | 2,600
1½ inch    |15 ft. drop | 2,380 | 2,625
1½ inch    |15 ft. drop | 2,450 | 2,600
1½ inch    |Shovels     | 2,270 | 2,445
1½ inch    |Shovels     | 2,305 | 2,642
===========+============+=======+========
3 inch     |15 ft. drop | 2,376 | 2,638
3 inch     |15 ft. drop | 2,360 | 2,505
3 inch     |15 ft. drop | 2,470 | 2,595
3 inch     |Shovels     | 2,270 | 2,601
3 inch     |Shovels     | 2,335 | 2,510
------------------------+-------+--------

~THEORY OF THE QUANTITY OF CEMENT IN MORTAR AND CONCRETE.~--All sand
contains a large percentage of voids; in 1 cu. ft. of loose sand there
is 0.3 to 0.5 cu. ft. of voids, that is, 30 to 50 per cent. of the sand
is voids. In making mortar the cement is mixed with the sand and the
flour-like particles of the cement fit in between the grains of sand
occupying a part or all of the voids. The amount of cement required in a
mortar will naturally depend upon the amount of voids in the particular
sand with which it is mixed and since a correct estimate of the number
of barrels of cement per cubic yard of mortar is very important, and
since it is not always possible to make actual mixtures before bidding,
rules based on various theories have been formulated for determining
these quantities. In this volume the rule based on the theory outlined
by one of the authors in 1901 will be followed. The following is a
discussion of the authors' theory:

When loose sand is mixed with water, its volume or bulk is increased;
subsequent jarring will decrease its volume, but still leave a net gain
of about 10 per cent.; that is, 1 cu. ft. of dry sand becomes about 1.1
cu. ft. of damp sand. Not only does this increase in the volume of the
sand occur, but, instead of increasing the voids that can be filled with
cement, there is an absolute loss in the volume of available voids. This
is due to the space occupied by the water necessary to bring the sand to
the consistency of mortar; furthermore, there is seldom a perfect
mixture of the sand and cement in practice, thus reducing the available
voids. It is safe to call this reduction in available voids about 10 per
cent.

When loose, dry Portland cement is wetted, it shrinks about 15 per cent,
in volume, behaving differently from the sand, but it never shrinks back
to quite as small a volume as it occupies when packed tightly in a
barrel. Since barrels of different brands vary widely in size, the
careful engineer or contractor will test any brand he intends using in
large quantities, in order to ascertain exactly how much cement paste
can be made. He will find a range of from 3.2 cu. ft. to 3.8 cu. ft. per
barrel of Portland cement. Obviously the larger barrel may be cheaper
though its price is higher. Specifications often state the number of
cubic feet that will be allowed per barrel in mixing the concrete
ingredients, so that any rule or formula to be of practical value must
contain a factor to allow for the specified size of the barrel, and
another factor to allow for the actual number of cubic feet of paste
that a barrel will yield--the two being usually quite different.

The deduction of a rational, practical formula for computing the
quantity of cement required for a given mixture will now be given, based
upon the facts above outlined.

     Let p = number of cu. ft. cement paste per bbl., as determined
                     by actual test.
         n = number of cu. ft. of cement per bbl., as specified in
                     the specifications.
         s = parts of sand (by volume) to one part of cement, as
                     specified.
         g = parts of gravel or broken stone (by volume) to one
                     part of cement, as specified.
         v = percentage of voids in the dry sand, as determined
                     by test.
         V = percentage of voids in the gravel or stone, as determined
                     by test.

Then, in a mortar of 1 part cement to s parts sand, we have:

               n s = cu. ft. of dry sand to 1 bbl. of cement.
             n s v = "   "   "  voids in the dry sand.
         0.9 n s v = "   "   "  available voids in the wet sand.
           1.1 n s = "   "   "  wet sand.
     p - 0.9 n s v = "   "   "  cement paste in excess of the voids.

Therefore:

     1.1 n s + (p - 0.9 n s v) = cu. ft. of mortar per bbl.

Therefore:

                    27                            27
     N = -------------------------   =    --------------------
         1.1 n s + (p - 0.9 n s v)        p + n s (1.1 - 0.9 v)

N being the number of barrels of cement per cu. yd. of mortar.

When the mortar is made so lean that there is not enough cement paste to
fill the voids in the sand, the formula becomes:

           27
     N = -------
         1.1 n s

A similar line of reasoning will give us a rational formula for
determining the quantity of cement in concrete; but there is one point
of difference between sand and gravel (or broken stone), namely, that
the gravel does not swell materially in volume when mixed with water.
However, a certain amount of water is required to wet the surface of the
pebbles, and this water reduces the available voids, that is, the voids
that can be filled by the mortar. With this in mind, the following
deduction is clear, using the nomenclature and symbols above given:

           ng = cu. ft. of dry gravel (or stone).
         ng V = "    "   " voids in dry gravel.
     0.9 ng V = "    "   " "available voids" in the wet gravel.
     p + n s (1.1 - 0.9 v) - 0.9 ng V = excess of mortar over the available
                  voids in the wet gravel.
     ng + p + n s (1.1 - 0.9 v) - 0.9 ng V = cu. ft. of concrete from
                 1 bbl. cement.


                              27
    N = -----------------------------------------------
         p + n s (1.1 - 0.9v) + ng (1 - 0.9V)

N being the number of barrels of cement required to make 1 cu. yd. of
concrete.

This formula is rational and perfectly general. Other experimenters may
find it desirable to use constants slightly different from the 1.1 and
the 0.9, for fine sands swell more than coarse sands, and hold more
water.

The reader must bear in mind that when the voids in the sand exceed the
cement paste, and when the available voids in the gravel (or stone)
exceed the mortar, the formula becomes:

           27
     N = ------
           ng

These formulas give the amounts of cement in mortars and concretes
compacted in place. Tables X to XIII are based upon the foregoing
theory, and will be found to check satisfactorily with actual tests.

In using these tables remember that the proportion of cement to sand is
by volume, and not by weight. If the specifications state that a barrel
of cement shall be considered to hold 4 cu. ft., for example, and that
the mortar shall be 1 part cement to 2 parts sand, then 2 barrel of
cement is mixed with 8 cu. ft. of sand, regardless of what is the actual
size of the barrel, and regardless of how much cement paste can be made
with a barrel of cement. If the specifications fail to state what the
size of a barrel will be, then the contractor is left to guess.


TABLE X.--BARRELS OF PORTLAND CEMENT PER CUBIC YARD OF MORTAR.

(Voids in sand being 35%, and 1 bbl. cement yielding 3.65 cu. ft. of
cement paste.)

----------------------------------+------+-------+------+-------+------+------
Proportion of Cement to Sand      |1 to 1|1 to 1½|1 to 2|1 to 2½|1 to 3|1 to 4
----------------------------------+------+-------+------+-------+------+------
                                  | Bbls.| Bbls. | Bbls.| Bbls. | Bbls.| Bbls.
Barrel specified to be 3.5 cu. ft.| 4.22 | 3.49  | 2.97 | 2.57  | 2.28 | 1.76
"         "       "    3.8        | 4.09 | 3.33  | 2.81 | 2.45  | 2.16 | 1.62
"         "       "    4.0        | 4.00 | 3.24  | 2.73 | 2.36  | 2.08 | 1.54
"         "       "    4.4        | 3.81 | 3.07  | 2.57 | 2.27  | 2.00 | 1.40
                                  +------+-------+------+-------+------+------
Cu. yds. sand per cu. yd. mortar  | 0.6  | 0.7   | 0.8  | 0.9   | 1.0  | 1.0
----------------------------------+------+-------+------+-------+------+------


TABLE XI.--BARRELS OF PORTLAND CEMENT PER CUBIC YARD OF MORTAR.

(Voids in sand being 45%, and 1 bbl. cement yielding 3.4 cu. ft. of
cement paste.)

----------------------------------+------+-------+------+-------+------+------
Proportion of Cement to Sand      |1 to 1|1 to 1½|1 to 2|1 to 2½|1 to 3|1 to 4
----------------------------------+------+-------+------+-------+------+------
                                  | Bbls.| Bbls. | Bbls.| Bbls. | Bbls.| Bbls.
Barrel specified to be 3.5 cu. ft.| 4.62 | 3.80  | 3.25 | 2.84  | 2.35 | 1.76
"        "         "   3.8  "     | 4.32 | 3.61  | 3.10 | 2.72  | 2.16 | 1.62
"        "         "   4.0  "     | 4.19 | 3.46  | 3.00 | 2.64  | 2.05 | 1.54
"        "         "   4.4  "     | 3.94 | 3.34  | 2.90 | 2.57  | 1.86 | 1.40
                                  +------+-------+------+-------+------+------
Cu. yds. sand per cu. yd. mortar  | 0.6  | 0.8   | 0.9  | 1.0   | 1.0  | 1.0
----------------------------------+------+-------+------+-------+------+------

If the specifications call for proportions by weight, assume a Portland
barrel to contain 380 lbs. of cement, and test the actual weight of a
cubic foot of the sand to be used. Sand varies extremely in weight, due
both to the variation in the per cent. of voids, and to the variation in
the kind of minerals of which the sand is composed. A quartz sand having
35 per cent. voids weighs 107 lbs. per cu. ft.; but a quartz sand
having 45 per cent. voids weighs only 91 lbs. per cu. ft. If the weight
of the sand must be guessed at, assume 100 lbs. per cu. ft. If the
specifications require a mixture of 1 cement to 2 of sand by weight, we
will have 380 lbs. (or 1 bbl.) of cement mixed with 2 × 380, or 760 lbs.
of sand; and if the sand weighs 90 lbs. per cu. ft., we shall have 760 ÷
90, or 8.44 cu. ft. of sand to every barrel of cement. In order to use
the tables above given, we may specify our own size of barrel; let us
say 4 cu. ft.; then 8.44 ÷ 4 gives 2.11 parts of sand by volume to 1
part of cement. Without material error we may call this a 1 to 2 mortar,
and use the tables, remembering that our barrel is now "specified to be"
4 cu. ft. If we have a brand of cement that yields 3.4 cu. ft. of paste
per bbl., and sand having 45 per cent. voids, we find that approximately
3 bbls. of cement per cu. yd. of mortar will be required.


TABLE XII.--INGREDIENTS IN 1 CUBIC YARD OF CONCRETE.

(Sand voids, 40%; stone voids, 45%; Portland cement barrel yielding 3.65
cu. ft. paste. Barrel specified to be 3.8 cu. ft.)

--------------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------
                                | 1:2:4 | 1:2:5 | 1:2:6 | 1:2½:5| 1:2½:6| 1:3:4
--------------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------
Bbls. cement per cu. yd. concr't|  1.46 |  1.30 |  1.18 |  1.13 |  1.00 |  1.25
Cu. yds. sand      "      "     |  0.41 |  0.36 |  0.33 |  0.40 |  0.35 |  0.53
Cu. yds. stone     "      "     |  0.82 |  0.90 |  1.00 |  0.80 |  0.84 |  0.71
--------------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------
Proportions by Volume.          | 1:3:5 | 1:3:6 | 1:3:7 | 1:4:7 | 1:4:8 | 1:4:9
--------------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------
Bbls. cement per cu. yd. concr't|  1.13 |  1.05 |  0.96 |  0.82 |  0.77 |  0.73
Cu. yds. sand      "      "     |  0.48 |  0.44 |  0.40 |  0.46 |  0.43 |  0.41
Cu. yds. stone     "      "     |  0.80 |  0.88 |  0.93 |  0.80 |  0.86 |  0.92
--------------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------

     NOTE.--This table is to be used where cement is measured packed
     in the barrel, for the ordinary barrel holds 3.8 cu. ft.

It should be evident from the foregoing discussions that no table can be
made, and no rule can be formulated that will yield accurate results
unless the brand of cement is tested and the percentage of voids in the
sand determined. This being so the sensible plan is to use the tables
merely as a rough guide, and, where the quantity of cement to be used is
very large, to make a few batches of mortar using the available brands
of cement and sand in the proportions specified. Ten dollars spent in
this way may save a thousand, even on a comparatively small job, by
showing what cement and sand to select.

It will be seen that Tables XII and XIII can be condensed into the
following rule:

_Add together the number of parts and divide this sum into ten, the
quotient will be approximately the number of barrels of cement per cubic
yard._


TABLE XIII.--INGREDIENTS IN 1 CUBIC YARD OF CONCRETE.

(Sand voids, 40%; stone voids, 45%; Portland cement barrel yielding 3.65
cu. ft. of paste. Barrel specified to be 4.4 cu. ft.)

--------------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+-----
Proportions by Volume.          |1:2:4 |1:2:5 |1:2:6 |1:2½:5|1:2½:6|1:3:4
--------------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+-----
Bbls. cement per cu. yd. concr't| 1.30 | 1.16 | 1.00 | 1.07 | 0.96 | 1.08
Cu. yds. sand   "          "    | 0.42 | 0.38 | 0.33 | 0.44 | 0.40 | 0.53
Cu. yds. stone  "          "    | 0.84 | 0.95 | 1.00 | 0.88 | 0.95 | 0.71
--------------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+-----
Proportions by Volume.          |1:3:5 |1:3:6 |1:3:7 |1:4:7 |1:4:8 |1:4:9
--------------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+-----
Bbls. cement per cu. yd. concr't| 0.96 | 0.90 | 0.82 | 0.75 | 0.68 | 0.64
Cu. yds. sand   "          "    | 0.47 | 0.44 | 0.40 | 0.49 | 0.44 | 0.42
Cu. yds. stone  "          "    | 0.78 | 0.88 | 0.93 | 0.86 | 0.88 | 0.95
--------------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+-----

     NOTE.--This table is to be used when the cement is measured
     loose, after dumping it into a box, for under such conditions a
     barrel of cement yields 4.4 cu. ft. of loose cement.

Thus for a 1:2:5 concrete, the sum of the parts is 1 + 2 + 5, which is
8; then 10 ÷ 8 is 1.25 bbls., which is approximately equal to the 1.30
bbls. given in the table. Neither is this rule nor are the tables
applicable if a different size of cement barrel is specified, or if the
voids in the sand or stone differ materially from 40 per cent. to 45 per
cent. respectively. There are such innumerable combinations of varying
voids, and varying sizes of barrel, that the authors do not deem it
worth while to give other tables. The following amounts of cement per
cubic yard of mortar were determined by test:

----------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Authority       | Neat.|1 to 1|1 to 2|1 to 3|1 to 4|1 to 5|1 to 6|1 to 7|1 to 8
----------------+-------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
                | Bbls.| Bbls.| Bbls.| Bbls.| Bbls.| Bbls.| Bbls.| Bbls.| Bbls.
Sabin           | 7.40 | 4.17 | 2.84 | 2.06 | 1.62 | 1.33 | 1.14 | .... | ....
W. B. Fuller    | 8.02 | 4.58 | 3.09 | 2.30 | 1.80 | 1.48 | 1.23 | 1.11 | 1.00
H. P. Boardman. | 7.40 | 4.50 | 3.18 | 2.35 | .... | .... | .... | .... | ....
----------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------

The proportions were by barrels of cement to barrels of sand, and Sabin
called a 380-lb. barrel 3.65 cu. ft., whereas Fuller called a 380-lb.
barrel 3.80 cu. ft.; and Boardman called a 380-lb. barrel 3.5 cu. ft.
Sabin used a sand having 38 per cent. voids; Fuller used a sand having
45 per cent. voids; and Boardman used a sand having 38 per cent. voids.
It will be seen that the cement used by Sabin yielded 3.65 cu. ft. of
cement paste per bbl. (i. e. 27 ÷ 7.4), whereas the (Atlas) cement used
by Fuller yielded 3.4 cu. ft. of cement paste per bbl. Sabin found that
a barrel of cement measured 4.37 cu. ft. when dumped and measured loose.
Mr. Boardman states a barrel (380 lbs., net) of Lehigh Portland cement
yields 3.65 cu. ft. of cement paste; and that a barrel (265 lbs., net)
of Louisville natural cement yields 3.0 cu. ft. of cement paste.

Mr. J. J. R. Croes, M. Am. Soc. C. E., states that 1 bbl. of Rosendale
cement and 2 bbl. of sand (8 cu. ft.) make 9.7 cu. ft. of mortar, the
extreme variations from this average being 7 per cent.

Frequently concrete is made by mixing one volume of cement with a given
number of volumes of pit gravel; no sand being used other than the sand
that is found naturally mixed with the gravel. In such cases the cement
rarely increases the bulk of the gravel, hence Table XIV will give the
approximate amount of cement, assuming 1 cu. yd. of gravel per cubic
yard of concrete.


TABLE XIV.--SHOWING BARRELS OF CEMENT PER CUBIC YARD OF VARIOUS MIXTURES
OF CEMENT AND PIT GRAVEL.

---------+------------------------------------------------------------
Spc. Vol.|Barrels of Cement per Cubic Yard of Concrete for Mixtures of
of bbl.  +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------------
cu. ft.  |  1-5  |  1-6  |  1-7  |  1-8  |  1-9  |  1-10 |  1-12
---------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------------
 3.8     | 1.41  | 1.18  | 1.01  | 0.874 | 0.789 | 0.71  |  0.59
 4.4     | 1.25  | 1.02  | 0.875 | 0.766 | 0.681 | 0.61  |  0.51
---------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------------

~PERCENTAGE OF WATER IN CONCRETE.~--Tests show that dry mixtures when
carefully deposited and well tamped produce the stronger concrete. This
superiority of dry mixtures it must be observed presupposes careful
deposition and thorough tamping, and these are tasks which are difficult
to have accomplished properly in actual construction work and which, if
accomplished properly, require time and labor. Wet mixtures readily flow
into the corners and angles of the forms and between and around the
reinforcing bars with only a small amount of puddling and slicing and
are, therefore, nearly always used because of the time and labor saved
in depositing and tamping. The following rule by which to determine the
percentage of water by weight for any given mixture of mortar for wet
concrete will be found satisfactory:

_Multiply the parts of sand by 8, add 24 to the product, and divide the
total by the sum of the parts of sand and cement._

For example if the percentage of water is required for a 1-3 mortar:

     (3 × 8) + 24
     ------------  = 12.
           4

Hence the water should be 12 per cent. of the combined weight of cement
and sand. For a 1-1 mortar the rule gives 16 per cent.; for a 1-2 mortar
it gives 13½ per cent., and for a 1-6 mortar it gives 10.3 per cent.

To calculate the amount of water per cubic yard of 1-3-6 concrete for
example the procedure would be as follows: By the above rule a 1-3
mortar requires

     (3 × 8) + 24
     ------------ = 12 per cent. water.
         4

A 1-3-6 concrete, according to Table XII, contains 1.05 bbls. cement and
0.44 cu. yd. sand. Cement weighs 380 lbs. per barrel, hence 1.05 bbls.
would weigh 380 × 1.05 = 399 lbs. Sand weighs 2,700 lbs. per cu. yd.,
hence 0.44 cu. yd. of sand would weigh 2,700 × 0.44 = 1,188 lbs. The
combined weight of the cement and sand would thus be 399 + 1,188 = 1,587
lbs. and 12 per cent. of 1.587 lbs. is 190 lbs. of water. Water weighs
8.355 lbs. per gallon, hence 190 × 8.355 = 23 gallons of water per cubic
yard of 1-3-6 concrete.

~METHODS OF MEASURING AND WEIGHING.~--The cement, sand and aggregate for
concrete mixtures are usually measured by hand, the measuring being done
either in the charging buckets or in the barrows or other receptacles
used to handle the material to the charging buckets. The process is
simple in either case when once the units of measurement are definitely
stated. This is not always the case. Some engineers require the
contractor to measure the sand and stone in the same sized barrel that
the cement comes in, in which case 1 part of sand or aggregate usually
means 3.5 cu. ft. Other engineers permit both heads of the barrel to be
knocked out for convenience in measuring the sand and stone, in which
case a barrel means 3.75 cu. ft. Still other engineers permit the cement
to be measured loose in a box, then a barrel usually means from 4 to 4.5
cu. ft. Cement is shipped either in barrels or in bags and the engineer
should specify definitely the volume at which he will allow the original
package to be counted, and also, if cement barrels are to be used in
measuring the sand and stone, he should specify what a "barrel" is to
be. When the concrete is to be mixed by hand the better practice is to
measure the sand and stone in bottomless boxes of the general type shown
by Fig. 10 and of known volume, and then specify that a bag of cement
shall be called 1 cu. ft., 0.6 cu. ft., or such other fraction of a
cubic foot as the engineer may choose. The contractor then has a
definite basis on which to estimate the quantity of cement required for
any specified mixture. The same is true if the measuring of the sand and
stone be done in barrows or in the charging bucket. The volume of the
bag or barrel of cement being specified the contractor has a definite
and simple problem to solve in measuring his materials.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.--Bottomless Box for Measuring Materials in
Proportioning Concrete.]

To avoid uncertainty and labor in measuring the cement, sand and stone
or gravel various automatic measuring devices have been designed. A
continuous mixer with automatic measuring and charging mechanism is
described in Chapter XIV. Figure 11 shows the Trump automatic measuring
device. It consists of a series of revolving cylinders, each opening
onto a "table," which revolves with the cylinders, and of a set of fixed
"knives," which, as the "tables" revolve, scrape off portions of the
material discharged from each cylinder onto its "table." The
illustration shows a set of two cylinders; for concrete work a third
cylinder is added. The three tables are set one above the other, each
with its storage cylinder, and being attached to the same spindle all
revolve together. For each table there is a knife with its own
adjusting mechanism. These knives may be adjusted at will to vary the
percentage of material scraped off.

[Illustration: Fig. 11.--Sketch Showing Trump Automatic Measuring Device
for Materials in Proportioning Concrete.]

Automatic measuring devices are most used in connection with continuous
mixers, but they may be easily adapted to batch mixers if desired. One
point to be observed is that all of these automatic devices measure the
cement loose and this must be allowed for in proportioning the mixture.




CHAPTER III.

METHODS AND COST OF MAKING AND PLACING CONCRETE BY HAND.


The making and placing of concrete by hand is divided into the following
operations: (1) Loading the barrows, buckets, carts or cars used to
transport the cement, sand and stone to the mixing board; (2)
Transporting and dumping the material; (3) Mixing the material by
turning with shovels and hoes; (4) Loading the concrete by shovels into
barrows, buckets, carts or cars; (5) Transporting the concrete to place;
(6) Dumping and spreading; (7) Ramming.

~LOADING INTO STOCK PILES.~--Stock piles should always be provided unless
there is some very good reason to the contrary. They prevent stoppage of
work through irregularities in the delivery of the material, and they
save foreman's time in watching that the material is delivered as
promptly as needed for the work immediately in hand. The location of the
stock piles should be as close to the work as possible without being in
the way of construction; forethought both in locating the piles and in
proportioning their size to the work will save the contractor money.

The stone and sand will ordinarily be delivered in wagons or cars. If
delivered in cars, effort should be made to secure delivery in flat cars
when the unloading is to be done by shoveling; this is more particularly
necessary for the broken stone. Stone can be shoveled from hopper bottom
cars only with difficulty as compared with shoveling from flat bottom
cars; the ratio is about 14 cu. yds. per day per man from hopper bottom
cars as compared with 20 cu. yds. per day per man from flat bottom cars.
When the cars can be unloaded through a trestle, hopper bottom cars
should by all means be secured for delivering the stone. If the amount
of work will justify the expense, a trestle may be built; often there is
a railway embankment which can be dug away for a short distance and the
track carried on stringers to make a dumping place, from which the stone
can be shoveled.

Sand can be dumped directly on the ground, but broken stone unless it is
very small, ¾-in. or less, should always be dumped on a well made plank
floor. A good floor is made of 2-in. plank, nailed to 4×6-in. mud sills,
spaced 3 ft. apart, and well bedded in the ground. Loose plank laid
directly on the ground settle unevenly and thus the smooth shoveling
surface which is sought is not obtained; the object of the floor is to
provide an even surface, along which a square pointed shovel can be
pushed; it is very difficult to force such a shovel into broken stone
unless it is very fine. A spading fork is a better tool than a shovel,
with which to load broken stone from piles. A man can load from 18 to 20
cu. yds. of broken stone into wheelbarrows or carts in 10 hours when
shoveling from a good floor, but he can load only 12 to 14 cu. yds. per
day when shoveling from a pile without such a floor. It is a common
thing to see stone unloaded from cars directly onto the sloping side of
a railway embankment. This makes very difficult shoveling and results in
a waste of stone. Stone can usually be delivered by a steel lined chute
directly to a flooring located at the foot of the embankment; coarse
broken stone if given a start when cast from a shovel will slide on an
iron chute having a slope as flat as 3 or 4 to 1; sand will not slide on
a slope of 1½ to 1. When chuting is not practicable it will pay often to
shovel the stone into buckets handled by a stiff-leg derrick rather than
to unload it onto the bank. Stock piles of ample storage capacity are
essential when delivery is by rail, because of the uncertainty of rail
shipments. When the contractor is taking the sand and stone direct from
pit and quarry by wagon it is not necessary to have large stock piles.

~LOADING FROM STOCK PILES.~--In loading sand into wheelbarrows or carts
with shovels a man will load 20 cu. yds. per 10-hour day if he is
energetic and is working under a good foreman. Under opposite conditions
15 cu. yds. per man per day is all that it is safe to count on. A man
shoveling from a good floor will load 20 cu. yds. of stone per 10-hour
day; this is reduced to 15 cu. yds. per day if the stone is shoveled off
the ground and to 12 cu. yds. per day if in addition the management is
poor. There are ordinarily in a cubic yard of concrete about 1 cu. yd.
of stone and 0.4 cu. yd. of sand, so that the cost of loading the
materials into barrows or carts, with wages at 15 cts. per hour and
assuming 15 cu. yds. to be a day's work, would be:

1   cu. yd. stone loaded for        10 cts.
0.4 cu. yd. sand loaded for          4 cts.
                                    -------
    Total                           14 cts.

To this is to be added the cost of loading the cement. This will cost
not over 2 cts. per cu. yd. of concrete; the total cost of loading
concrete materials into barrows or carts, therefore, does not often
exceed 16 cts. per cu. yd. of concrete.

~TRANSPORTING MATERIALS TO MIXING BOARDS~--Carrying the sand and stone
from stock piles to mixing board in shovels should never be practiced.
It takes from 100 to 150 shovelfuls of stone to make 1 cu. yd.; it,
therefore, costs 50 cts. per cu. yd. to carry it 100 ft. and return
empty handed, for in walking short distances the men travel very
slowly--about 150 ft. per minute. It costs more to walk a half dozen
paces with stone carried in shovels than to wheel it in barrows.

The most common method of transporting materials from stock piles to
mixing boards is in wheelbarrows. The usual wheelbarrow load on a level
plank runway is 3 bags of cement (300 lbs) or 3 cu. ft. of sand or
stone. If a steep rise must be overcome to reach the mixing platform the
load will be reduced to 2 bags (200 lbs.) of cement or 2 cu. ft. of sand
or stone. A man wheeling a barrow travels at a rate of 200 ft. per
minute, going and coming, and loses ¾ minute each trip dumping the load,
fixing run planks, etc. An active man will do 20 to 25 per cent. more
work than this, while a very lazy man may do 20 per cent. less. With
wages at 15 cts. per hour, the cost of wheeling materials for 1 cu. yd.
of concrete may be obtained by the following rule:

_To a fixed cost of 4 cts. (for lost time) add 1 ct. for every 20 ft. of
distance away from the stock pile if there is a steep rise in the
runway, but if the runway is level, add 1 ct. for every 30 ft. distance
of haul._

Since loading the barrows, as given above, was 16 cts. per cu. yd., the
total fixed cost is 16 + 4 = 20 cts. per cu. yd., to which is added 1
ct. for every 20 or 30 ft. haul depending on the grade of the runway.

The preceding figures assume the use of plank runways for the
wheelbarrows. These should never be omitted, and the barrows wheeled
over the ground. Even a hard packed earth path in dry weather is
inferior to a plank runway and when the ground is soft or muddy the loss
in efficiency of the men is serious. Where the runway must rise to the
mixing board, give it a slope or grade seldom steeper than 1 in 8, and
if possible flatter. Make a runway on a trestle at least 18 ins. wide,
so that men will be in no danger of falling. See to it, also, that the
planks are so well supported that they do not spring down when walked
over, for a springy plank makes hard wheeling. If the planks are so long
between the "horses" or "bents" used to support them, that they spring
badly, it is usually a simple matter to nail a cleat across the
underside of the planks and stand an upright strut underneath to support
and stiffen the plank.

When two-wheeled carts of the type shown by Fig. 12 are used the runway
requires two lines of planks.

Two-wheeled carts pushed by hand have been less used for handling
concrete materials than for handling concrete, but for distances from 50
to 150 ft. from stock pile to mixing board such carts are probably
cheaper for transporting materials than are wheelbarrows. These carts
hold generally three wheelbarrow loads and they are handled by one man
practically as rapidly and easily as is a wheelbarrow.

For all distances over 50 ft. from stock pile to mixing board, it is
cheaper to haul materials in one-horse dump carts than it is in
wheelbarrows. A cart should be loaded in 4 minutes and dumped in about 1
minute, making 5 minutes lost time each round trip. It should travel at
a speed of not less than 200 ft. per minute, although it is not unusual
to see variations of 15 or 20 per cent., one way or another, from this
average, depending upon the management of the work. A one-horse cart
will readily carry enough stone and sand to make ½ cu. yd. of concrete,
if the roads are fairly hard and level; and a horse can pull this load
up a 10 per cent. (rise of 1 ft. in 10 ft.) planked roadway provided
with cleats to give a foothold. If a horse, cart and driver can be hired
for 30 cts. per hour, the cost of hauling the materials for 1 cu. yd. of
concrete is given by the following rule:

_To a fixed cost of 5 cts. (for lost time at both ends of haul) add 1
ct. for every 100 ft. of distance from stock pile to mixing board._

[Illustration: Fig. 12.--Two-Wheeled Ransome Cart for Hauling Concrete.]

Where carts are used it is possible to locate the stock piles several
hundred feet from the mixing boards without adding materially to the
cost of the concrete. It is well, however, to have the stock piles in
sight of the foreman at the mixing board, so as to insure promptness of
delivery.

~METHODS AND COST OF MIXING.~--In mixing concrete by hand the materials
are spread in superimposed layers on a mixing board and mixed together
first dry and then with water by turning them with shovels or hoes. The
number of turns, the relative arrangement of the layers, and the
sequence of operations vary in practice with the notions of the
engineer controlling the work. No one mode of procedure in hand mixing
can, therefore, be specified for general application; the following are
representative examples of practice in hand mixing:

Measure the stone in a bottomless box and spread it until its thickness
in inches equals its parts by volume. Measure the sand in a bottomless
box set on the stone and spread the sand evenly over the stone layer.
Place the cement on the sand and spread evenly. Turn the material twice
with a square pointed shovel and then turn it a third time while water
is gently sprinkled on. A fourth turn is made to mix thoroughly the
water and the concrete is then shoveled into barrows, giving it a fifth
turn. Mr. Ernest McCullough, who gives this method, states that it is
the cheapest way to mix concrete by hand and still secure a good quality
of output.

In work done by Mr. H. P. Boardman the sand is measured in a bottomless
box and over it is spread the cement in an even layer. The cement and
sand are mixed dry with hoes, the water is added in pailfuls and the
whole mixed to a uniform porridge-like consistency. Into this thin
mortar all the stone for a batch is dumped, the measuring box is lifted
and the mixture turned by shovels. A pair of shovelers, one on each
side, is started at one end turning the material back and working toward
the opposite end. A second pair of shovelers takes the turned material
and turns it again. The concrete is then shoveled into the barrows by
the wheelers themselves as fast as it is turned the second time. By this
method a good gang of 20 to 25 men, using two boxes, will, Mr. Boardman
states, mix and place 45 to 60 cu. yds. of concrete in 10 hours,
depending on the wheelbarrow travel necessary. Assuming a gang of 25
men, this is a rate of 1.8 to 2.4 cu. yds. per man per 10-hour day,
concrete mixed and placed.

A method somewhat similar to the one just outlined is given by Mr. O. K.
Morgan. A mixing board made of 7/8-in. matched boards nailed to 2×3-in.
sills is used, with a mixing box about 8 ft. long, 4 ft. wide and 10 to
12 ins. deep. This box is set alongside the mixing board and in it the
cement and sand are mixed first dry and then wet; a fairly wet mortar is
made. Meanwhile the stone is spread in an even layer 6 ins. thick on
the mixing board and thoroughly drenched with water. The mortar from the
mixing box is cast by shovels in a fairly even layer over the stone and
the whole is turned two or three times with shovels, generally two turns
are enough. Six men are employed; two prepare the mortar, while four get
the stone in readiness, then all hands finish the operation.

The following method is given by Mr. E. Sherman Gould: Spread the sand
in a thin layer on the mixing board and over it spread the cement. Mix
dry with shovels, using four men, one at each corner, turning outward
and then working back again. Over the dry sand and cement mixture spread
the broken stone which has been previously wetted and on top of the
stone apply water evenly. The water will thus percolate through the
stone without splashing and evenly wet the sand and cement. Finally turn
the whole, using the same number of men and the same mode of procedure
as were used in dry mixing the sand and cement. Mr. Gould states that by
this method the contractor should average 2 cu. yds. of mixed concrete
per man per 10-hour day.

A novel method of hand mixing and an unusual record of output is
described by Maj. H. M. Chittenden, U. S. A., in connection with the
construction of a concrete arch bridge. The mixing was done by hand on a
single board 25 ft. long and sloping slightly from one end to the other.
The materials were dumped together on the upper end of the board.
Sixteen men were stationed along the board, eight on each side. The
first two men turned the mixture dry. Next to them stood a man who
applied the water after each shovelful. The next mixers kept turning the
material along and another waterman assisted in wetting it further down
the board. The men at the end of the board shoveled the concrete into
the carts which took it to the work. Each batch contained 18 cu. ft., or
0.644 cu. yd., and the rate of mixing was 10 cu. yds. per hour, or 6.25
cu. yds. per man per 10-hour day. The work of getting the materials
properly proportioned to the mixing board is not included in this
figure, but the loading of the mixed concrete is included.

It is plain from the foregoing, that specifications for hand mixing
should always state the method to be followed, and particularly the
number of turns necessary. If these matters are not specified the
contractor has to guess at the probable requirements of the engineer.
The authors have known of inspectors demanding from 6 to 9 turns of the
materials when specifications were ambiguous. It should also be made
clear whether or not the final shoveling into the barrows or carts
constitutes a turn, and whether any subsequent shoveling of the concrete
into place constitutes a turn. Inspectors and foremen have frequent
disputes over these questions.

Estimates of the cost of hand mixing may usually be figured upon the
number of times that the materials are to be turned by shovels. A
contractor is seldom required to turn the sand and cement more than
three times dry and three times wet, and then turn the mortar and stone
three times. A willing workman, under a good foreman, will turn over
mortar at the rate of 30 cu. yds. in 10 hours, lifting each shovelful
and casting it into a pile. With wages at $1.50 and six turns, this
means a cost of 5 cts. per cubic yard of mortar for each turn; as there
is seldom more than 0.4 cu. yd. of mortar in a cubic yard of concrete,
we have a cost of 2 cts. per cubic yard of concrete for each turn that
is given the mortar. So if the mortar is given six turns before the
stone is added and then the stone and mortar are mixed by three turns we
have: (2 cts. × 6) + (5 cts. × 3) = 12 + 15 = 27 cts. per cubic yard for
mixing concrete. In pavement foundation work two turns of the mortar
followed by two turns of the mortar and stone are considered sufficient.
The cost of mixing per cubic yard of concrete is then (2 cts. × 2) + (5
cts. × 2) = 4 + 10 = 14 cts. per cubic yard of concrete. One
specification known to the authors, requires six turns dry and three
turns wet for the mortar; under such specifications the cost of mixing
the mortar would be 50 per cent. higher than in the first example
assumed. On the other hand, they have seen concrete mixed for street
pavement foundation with only three turns before shoveling it into
place. These costs of mixing apply to work done by diligent men; easy
going men will make the cost 25 to 50 per cent greater.

~LOADING AND HAULING MIXED CONCRETE.~--Wheelbarrows and carts are employed
to haul the mixed concrete to the work. The loading of these with mixed
concrete by shoveling costs less than the loading of the materials
separately before mixing. While the weight is greater because of the
added water the volume of the concrete is much less than that of the
ingredients before mixing. Again the shoveling is done off a smooth
board with the added advantage of having the material lubricated and,
finally, the foreman is usually at this point to crowd the work. A good
worker will load 12½ cu. yds. of concrete per 10-hour day, and with
wages at $1.50 per day this would give a cost of 12 cts. per cu. yd. for
loading.

Practically the same principles govern the transporting of concrete in
barrows as govern the handling of the raw materials in them. The cost of
wheeling concrete is practically the same as for wheeling the dry
ingredients, so that the total cost of loading and wheeling may be
estimated by the following rule:

_To a fixed cost of 16 cts. for loading and lost time add 1 ct. for
every 30 ft. of level haul._

Within a few years wheelbarrows have been supplanted to a considerable
extent by hand carts of the general type shown by Fig. 12, which
illustrates one made by the Ransome Concrete Machinery Co. The bowl of
this cart has a capacity of 6 cu. ft. water measure. It is hung on a
1¼-in. steel axle; the wheels are 42 ins. in diameter with staggered
spokes and 2-in. half oval tires. The top of the bowl is 29½ ins. from
the ground. Owing to the large diameter of the wheels and the fact that
no weight comes on the wheeler, as with a wheelbarrow, this cart is
handled by one man about as rapidly and easily as is a wheelbarrow. It
will be noted that the two ends of the bowl differ in shape; the handle
is removable and can be attached to either end of the bowl. With the
handle attached as shown the bowl can be inverted for discharging onto a
pavement or floor; with the handle transferred to the opposite end the
bowl is fitted for dumping into narrow beam or wall forms. The maximum
load of wet concrete for a wheelbarrow is 2 cu. ft., and this is a heavy
load and one that is seldom averaged--1 to 1½ cu. ft. is more nearly the
general average. A cart of the above type will, therefore, carry from 3
to 5 wheelbarrow loads, and on good runways, which are essential, may be
pushed and dumped about as rapidly as a wheelbarrow. In succeeding pages
are given records of actual work with hand carts which should be studied
in this connection.

Portland cement concrete can be hauled a considerable distance in a dump
cart or wagon before it begins to harden; natural cement sets too
quickly to permit of its being hauled far. Portland cement does not
begin to set in less than 30 minutes. On a good road, with no long,
steep hills a team will haul a loaded wagon at a speed of about 200 ft.
per minute; it, therefore, takes 6½ minutes to travel a quarter of a
mile, 13 minutes to travel half a mile, and 26 minutes to travel a mile.
Portland cement concrete can, therefore, be hauled a mile before it
begins to set. The cost of hauling concrete in carts is about the same
as the cost of hauling the raw materials as given in a preceding
section.

When hand mixing is employed in building piers, abutments, walls, etc.,
the concrete often has to be hoisted as well as wheeled. A gallows frame
or a mast with a pulley block at the top and a team of horses can often
be used in such cases as described in Chapter XII for filling cylinder
piers, or in the same chapter for constructing a bridge abutment. It is
also possible often to locate the mixing board on high ground, perhaps
at some little distance from the forms. If this can be done, the use of
derricks may be avoided as above suggested or by building a light pole
trestle from the mixing board to the forms. The concrete can then be
wheeled in barrows and dumped into the forms. If the mixing board can be
located on ground as high as the top of the concrete structure is to be,
obviously a trestle will enable the men to wheel on a level runway. Such
a trestle can be built very cheaply, especially where second-hand
lumber, or lumber that can be used subsequently for forms is available.
A pole trestle whose bents are made entirely of round sticks cut from
the forest is a very cheap structure, if a foreman knows how to throw it
together and up-end the bents after they are made. One of the authors
has put up such trestles for 25 cts. per lineal foot of trestle,
including all labor of cutting the round timber, erecting it, and
placing a plank flooring 4 ft. wide on top. The stringers and flooring
plank were used later for forms, and their cost is not included. A
trestle 100 ft. long can thus be built at less cost than hauling,
erecting and taking down a derrick; and once the trestle is up it saves
the cost of operating a derrick.

In conclusion, it should be remarked that the comparative economy for
concrete work of the different methods of haulage described, does not
depend wholly on the comparative transportation costs; the effect of the
method of haulage on the cost of dumping and spreading costs must be
considered. For example, if carts deliver the material in such form that
the cost of spreading is greatly increased over what it would be were
the concrete delivered in wheelbarrows, the gain made by cart haulage
may be easily wiped out or even turned into loss by the extra spreading
charges. These matters are considered more at length in the succeeding
section.

~DUMPING, SPREADING AND RAMMING.~--The cost of dumping wheelbarrows and
carts is included in the rules of cost already given, excepting that in
some cases it is necessary to add the wages of a man at the dump who
assists the cart drivers or the barrow men. Thus in dumping concrete
from barrows into a deep trench or pit, it is usually advisable to dump
into a galvanized iron hopper provided with an iron pipe chute. One man
can readily dump all the barrows that can be filled from a concrete
mixer in a day, say 150 cu. yds. At this rate of output the cost of
dumping would be only 1 ct. per cu. yd., but if one man were required to
dump the output of a small gang of men, say 25 cu. yds., the cost of
dumping would be 6 cts. per cu. yd.

Concrete dumped through a chute requires very little work to spread it
in 6-in. layers; and, in fact, concrete that can be dumped from
wheelbarrows, which do not all dump in one place, can be spread very
cheaply; for not more than half the pile dumped from the barrow needs to
be moved, and then moved merely by pushing with a shovel. Since the
spreader also rams the concrete, it is difficult to separate these two
items. As nearly as the authors have been able to estimate this item of
spreading "dry" concrete dumped from wheelbarrows in street paving
work, the cost is 5 cts. per cu. yd. If, on the other hand, nearly all
the concrete must be handled by the spreaders, as in spreading concrete
dumped from carts, the cost is fully double, or 10 cts. per cu. yd. And
if the spreader has to walk even 3 or 4 paces to place the concrete
after shoveling it up, the cost of spreading will be 15 cts. per cu. yd.
For this reason it is apparent that carts are not as economical as
wheelbarrows for hauling concrete up to about 200 ft., due to the added
cost of spreading material delivered by carts.

The preceding discussion of spreading is based upon the assumption that
the concrete is not so wet that it will run. Obviously where concrete is
made of small stones and contains an excess of water, it will run so
readily as to require little or no spreading.

The cost of ramming concrete depends almost entirely upon its dryness
and upon the number of cubic yards delivered to the rammers. Concrete
that is mixed with very little water requires long and hard ramming to
flush the water to the surface. The yardage delivered to the rammers is
another factor, because if only a few men are engaged in mixing they
will not be able to deliver enough concrete to keep the rammers properly
busy, yet the rammers by slow though continuous pounding may be keeping
up an appearance of working. Then, again, it has been noticed that the
slower the concrete is delivered the more particular the average
inspector becomes. Concrete made "sloppy" requires no ramming at all,
and very little spading. The authors have had men do very thorough
ramming of moderately dry concrete for 15 cts. per cu. yd., where the
rammers had no spreading to do, the material being delivered in shovels.
It is rare indeed that spreading and ramming can be made to cost more
than 40 cts. per cu. yd., under the most foolish inspection, yet one
instance is recorded which, because of its rarity, is worth noting: Mr.
Herman Conrow is the authority for the data: 1 foreman, 9 men mixing, 1
ramming, averaged 15 cu. yds. a day, or only 1½ cu. yds. per man per
day, when laying wet concrete. When laying dry concrete the same gang
averaged only 8 cu. yds. a day, there being 4 men ramming. With foreman
at $2 and laborers at $1.50 a day, the cost was $2.12 per cu. yd. for
labor on the dry concrete as against $1.13 per cu. yd. for the wet
concrete. Three turnings of the stone with a wet mortar effected a
better mixture than four turnings with a dry mortar. The ramming of the
wet concrete cost 10 cts. per cu. yd., whereas the ramming of the dry
concrete cost 75 cts. per cu. yd. The authors think this is the highest
cost on record for ramming. It is evident, however, that the men were
under a poor foreman, for an output of only 15 cu. yds. per day with 10
men is very low for ordinary conditions. Moreover, the expensive amount
of ramming indicates either poor management or the most foolish
inspection requirements.

In conclusion it may be noted that if engineers specify a dry concrete
and "thorough ramming," they would do well also to specify what the word
"thorough" is to mean, using language that can be expressed in cents per
cubic yard. It is a common thing, for example, to see a sewer trench
specification in which one tamper is required for each two men shoveling
the back-fill into the trench; and some such specific requirement should
be made in a concrete specification if close estimates from reliable
contractors are desired. Surely no engineer will claim that this is too
unimportant a matter for consideration when it is known that ramming can
easily be made to cost as high as 40 cts. per cu. yd., depending largely
upon the whim of the inspector.

~THE COST OF SUPERINTENDENCE.~--This item is obviously dependent upon the
yardage of concrete handled under one foreman and the daily wages of the
foreman. If a foreman receives $3 a day and is bossing a job where only
12 cu. yds. are placed daily, we have a cost of 25 cts. per cu. yd. for
superintendence. If the same foreman is handling a gang of 20 men whose
output is 50 cu. yds., the superintendence item is only 6 cts. per cu.
yd. If the same foreman is handling a concrete-mixing plant having a
daily output of 150 cu. yds., the cost of superintendence is but 2 cts.
per cu. yd. These elementary examples have been given simply because
figures are more impressive than generalities, and because it is so
common a sight to see money wasted by running too small a gang of men
under one foreman.

Of all classes of contract work, none is more readily estimated day by
day than concrete work, not only because it is usually built in regular
shapes whose volumes are easily ascertained at the end of each day, but
because a record of the bags, or barrels, or batches gives a ready
method of computing the output of each gang. For this reason small gangs
of concrete workers need no foreman at all, provided one of the workers
is given command and required to keep tally of the batches. If the
efficiency of a gang of 6 men were to fall off, say, 15 per cent., by
virtue of having no regular non-working foreman in charge, the loss
would be only $1.35 a day--a loss that would be more than
counterbalanced by the saving of a foreman's wages. Indeed, the
efficiency of a gang of 6 men would have to fall off 25 per cent., or
more, before it would pay to put a foreman in charge. In many cases the
efficiency will not fall off at all, provided the gang knows that its
daily progress is being recorded, and that prompt discharge will follow
laziness. Indeed, one of the authors has more than once had the
efficiency increased by leaving a small gang to themselves in command of
one of the workers who was required to punch a hole in a card for every
batch.

To reduce the cost of superintendence there is no surer method than to
work two gangs of 18 to 20 men, side by side, each gang under a separate
foreman who is striving to make a better showing than his competitor.
This is done with marked advantage in street paving, and could be done
elsewhere oftener than it is.

In addition to the cost of a foreman in direct charge of the laborers,
there is always a percentage of the cost of general superintendence and
office expenses to be added. In some cases a general superintendent is
put in charge of one or two foremen; and, if he is a high-salaried man,
the cost of superintendence becomes a very appreciable item.

~SUMMARY OF COSTS.~--Having thus analyzed the costs of making and placing
concrete, we can understand why it is that printed records of costs vary
so greatly. Moreover, we are enabled to estimate the labor cost with far
more accuracy than we can guess it; for by studying the requirements of
the specifications, and the local conditions governing the placing of
stock piles, mixing boards, etc., we can estimate each item with
considerable accuracy. The purpose, however, has not been solely to show
how to predict the labor cost, but also to indicate to contractors and
their foremen some of the many possibilities of reducing the cost of
work once the contract has been secured. An analysis of costs, such as
above given, is the most effective way of discovering unnecessary
"leaks," and of opening one's eyes to the possibilities of effecting
economies in any given case.

To indicate the method of summarizing the costs of making concrete by
hand, let us assume that the concrete is to be put into a deep
foundation requiring wheeling a distance of 30 ft.; that the stock piles
are on plank 60 ft. distant from the mixing board; that the
specifications call for 6 turns of gravel concrete thoroughly rammed in
6-in. layers; and that a good sized gang of, say, 16 men (at $1.50 a day
each), is to work under a foreman receiving $2.70 a day. We then have
the following summary by applying the rules already given:

                                                Per cu. yd.
                                                concrete.
Loading sand, stone and cement                    $ .17
Wheeling 60 ft. in barrows (4 + 2 cts.)             .06
Mixing concrete, 6 turns at 5 cts.                  .30
Wheeling 30 ft. (4 + 1 ct.)                         .05
Dumping barrows (1 man helping barrowman)           .05
Spreading and heavy ramming                         .15
                                                 ------
Total cost of labor                                $.90
Foreman, at $2.70 a day                             .10
                                                 ------
Grand total                                       $1.00

To estimate the daily output of this gang of 16 laborers proceed thus:
Divide the daily wages of all the 16 men, expressed in cents, by the
labor cost of the concrete in cents, the quotient will be the cubic
yards output of the gang. Thus, 2,400 ÷ 90 is 27 cu. yds., in this case.

In street paving work where no man is needed to help dump the
wheelbarrows, and where it is usually possible to shovel concrete direct
from the mixing board into place, and where half as much ramming as
above assumed is usually satisfactory, we see that the last four labor
items instead of amounting to 12 + 5 + 5 + 15, or 37 cts., amount only
to one-half of the last item, one-half of 15 cts., or 7½ cts. This
makes the total labor cost only 60 cts. instead of 90 cts. If we divide
2,400 cts. (the total day's wages of 16 men) by 60 cts. (the labor cost
per cu. yd.), we have 40, which is the cubic yards output of the 16 men.
This greater output of the 16 men reduces the cost of superintendence to
7 cts. per cu. yd.




CHAPTER IV.

METHODS AND COST OF MAKING AND PLACING CONCRETE BY MACHINE.


The making and placing of concrete is virtually a manufacturing process.
This process as performed by manual labor is discussed in the preceding
chapter; it will be discussed here as it is performed by machinery. The
objects sought in using machinery for making and placing concrete are:
(1) The securing of a more perfectly mixed and uniform concrete, and (2)
the securing of a cheaper cost of concrete in place. As in every other
manufacturing process both objects cannot be obtained to the highest
degree without co-ordinate and universal efficiency throughout in plant
and methods. For example, the substitution of machine mixing for hand
mixing will not alone ensure cheaper concrete. If all materials are
delivered to the machine in wheelbarrows and if the concrete is conveyed
away in wheelbarrows, the cost of making concrete even with machine
mixers is high. On the other hand, where the materials are fed from bins
by gravity into the mixer and when the mixed concrete is hauled away in
cars, the cost of making the concrete may be very low. Making and
placing concrete by machinery involves not one but several mechanical
operations working in conjunction--in a word, a concrete making plant is
required.

The mechanical equipment of a concrete making plant has four duties to
perform. (1) It has to transport the raw materials from the cars or
boats or pits and place them in the stock piles or storage bins; (2) it
has to take the raw materials from stock and charge them to the mixer;
(3) it has to mix the raw materials into concrete and discharge the
mixture into transportable vehicles; and (4) it has to transport these
vehicles from the mixer to the work and discharge them. As all these
operations are interrelated component parts of one great process, it is
plain why one operation cannot lag without causing all the other
operations to slow up.

The mechanical devices which may be used for each of these operations
are various, and they may be combined in various ways to make the
complete train of machinery necessary to the complete process. In this
chapter we shall describe the character and qualities of each type of
devices separately. The practicable ways of combining them to form a
complete concrete making plant are best illustrated by descriptions and
records of work of actual plants, and such descriptions and records for
each class of structure considered in this book are given in the
following chapters and may be found by consulting the index. In
describing the various machines and devices we have made one
classification for those used in handling raw materials and mixed
concrete, for the reason that nearly all of them are suitable for either
purpose.

~UNLOADING WITH GRAB BUCKETS.~--The orange-peel or clam-shell bucket is an
excellent device for unloading sand or stone from cars or barges. The
cost of unloading, including cleaning up the portions not reached by the
bucket, is not more than from 2 to 5 cts. per cu. yd. A grab bucket of
either of these types can be applied to any derrick. In unloading broken
stone from barges at Ossining, N. Y., a Hayward clam-shell on a
stiff-leg derrick unloaded 100 cu. yds. of broken stone per day from
barge into wagons, with one engineman and one helper. In addition to the
bucket work there was 24 hours' labor cleaning on each 500-cu. yd. barge
load. The labor cost of unloading a 500-cu. yd. barge was as follows:

                                     Per Cu. Yd.
One engineman, at $2.50                 2.5 cts.
One helper, at $1.50                    1.5 cts.
Labor cleaning, at $1.50                0.7 cts.
                                        --------
Total cost per cubic yard               4.7 cts.

~INCLINES.~--Inclines to reach the tops of mixer and storage bins and the
level of concrete work can be operated on about the following grades:
For teams hauling wagons or cars, 2 per cent. maximum grade. A single
heavy team will haul a 5-cu. yd. car, with ordinary bearings, weighing
2½ tons empty and 12 tons loaded, with ease on a 1½ per cent. grade,
and with some difficulty on a 2 per cent. grade. A locomotive will
handle cars on a grade of from 4 to 5 per cent. For team haulage 20-lb.
rails may be used, and for locomotives 30-lb. rails. Grades steeper than
about 5 per cent. require cable haulage.

~TRESTLE AND CAR PLANTS.~--Trestle and car plants for handling both
concrete materials and mixed concrete have a wide range of application
and numerous examples of such plants are described in succeeding
chapters, and are noted in the index at the end of the book. The
following estimates of the cost of a trestle and car plant are given by
Mr. Wm. G. Fargo. The work is assumed to cover an area of 100×200 ft.
and to have three-fourths of its bulk below the economical elevation of
the mixer, which stands within 50 ft. of the near side of the work. If
the work is under 3,000 cu. yds. in bulk and there is a reasonable time
limit for completion one mixer of 200 cu. yds. capacity per 10-hour day
is assumed to be sufficient. The items of car plant cost will be about
as follows:

150 ft. trestle, at $1.50                               $225
5 split switches with spring bridles, at $18              90
2 iron turntables, at $30                                 60
3-2/3 cu. yd. steel cars with roller bearings            190
                                                      ------
Total                                                   $565

The trestle assumed is double 24-in. gage track, 6 ft. on centers;
stringers 6×8 ins.×22 to 24 ft.; ties 2×6 ins., 2½ ft. on centers;
running boards 2×12 ins. for each track, and 12-lb. rails; trestle legs,
average length 30 ft., of green poles at 5 cts. per foot. This outfit
with repairs and renewals amounting to 10 per cent., is considered good
for five season's work and the timber work for several jobs if not too
far apart. The yearly rental on the basis of five seasons' work would be
$124.30, or $1 per working day for a season of five months. Three cars
delivering ½ cu. yd. batches can deliver 200 cu. yds. of concrete, an
average of 100 ft. from the mixer in 10 hours. Five men, including a man
tending switches and turntable and one man to help dump, can operate the
plant. With wages at $1.75 per day the labor cost of handling 200 cu.
yds. of concrete would be 4-1/8 cts. per cu. yd.

~CABLEWAYS.~--Cableways arranged to span the work and if the area is wide
to travel across the work at right angles to the span will handle
concrete, concrete materials, forms, steel and supplies with great
economy. They are particularly suitable for bridge and dam work, filter
and reservoir work, building foundations and low buildings. The
arrangement of a cableway plant for bridge work is described in Chapter
XVII. A cableway of 800 ft. clear span on fixed towers 45 ft. high will
cost complete from $4,500 to $5,000, and will handle 200 cu. yds. of
concrete per 10-hour day. To put the cableway on traveling towers will
cost about $1,000 more. In constructing the Pittsburg filtration work
four traveling cableways from 250 to 600 ft. span were used. The towers
were from 50 to 60 ft. in height and each traveled on a 5-rail track.
The cableways were self-propelling. With conditions favorable each
cableway delivered 300 cu. yds. of concrete per day. A cableway plant
for heavy fortification work is described in Chapter XI.

~BELT CONVEYORS.~--Belt conveyors may be used successfully for handling
both concrete materials and mixed concrete. For handling wet concrete
the slope must be quite flat, and the belt must be provided with some
means of cleaning off the sticky mortar paste. In several cases rotating
brushes stationed at the end of the belt, where it turns over the tail
pulley, have worked successfully; these brushes sweep the belt clean.
Except for the cleaning device the ordinary arrangement of belt conveyor
for dry materials serves for concrete.

In constructing a large gas works at Astoria, Long Island, near New York
city, belt conveyors were used to handle both the sand, gravel and
cement bags and the mixed concrete. The belt for handling sand and
gravel is shown by Fig. 13. A derrick operating a clam-shell unloaded
the sand and gravel into a small hopper, discharging into dump cars
operated by a "dinky" up an incline, passing over sand and gravel
storage bins. A 20-in. belt conveyor ran horizontally 105 ft. under the
bins, then up an incline of 3.4 ft. in 125 ft. to feeding hoppers over
the mixers. This conveyor received alternately sand and gravel by chute
from the storage bins and bags of cement loaded by hand, and carried
them to the feeding bins and mixer platform. The speed of the belt was
350 ft. per minute, and it required 6 h.p. to operate it when carrying
100 tons per hour. The mixing was done in two Smith mixers, which turned
out 70 cu. yds. or 35 cu. yds. each per hour. The mixed concrete was
delivered onto a 50-ft. 24-in. belt conveyor traveling at a speed of 400
ft. per minute and dumping through a chute into cars. Only 1 h.p. was
required to run the concrete conveyor. A rotating brush was used to keep
the belt clean at the dumping end. It will be noted that only a small
amount of power is required for operation.

[Illustration: Fig. 13.--Belt Conveyor Transporting Sand and Gravel.]

~CHUTES.~--Chutes of wood or iron are among the simplest and most
efficient means of moving the cement, sand and stone and the mixed
concrete when the ground levels permit such devices.

Bags of cement if given a start in casting will slide down a steel or
very smooth wooden chute with a slope of 1 ft. in 5 or 6 ft. A wooden
trough 12 ins. deep and 24 ins. wide with boards dressed on the inside
may be used. When the inclination is steep and the fall is great, some
device is necessary to diminish the velocity of descent; the following
is an example of such a device which was successfully employed in a
chute of the above dimensions, 400 ft. long and having a drop of 110 ft.
This chute had a maximum inclination of 45° and its lower end curved to
a horizontal tangent, running into the storehouse. Near the bottom of
the chute a horizontal strip was nailed across the upper edges and to it
was nailed the upper end of a 20 ft., 1×12-in. board, the lower end of
which rested on the bottom of the chute. Several pieces of timber spiked
to the upper side loaded the lower end of this board. The cement bag in
descending wedged itself into the angle between the chute and the board
and lifted the latter, the spring of the board and the weight at the
lower end offering enough resistance to cut down the velocity. After the
chute had been in use for some time and had worn smooth it was found
necessary to add two more brakes to check the bags.

Broken stone will slide down a steel or steel lined chute with a slope
of 1 in 3 or 4 ft. if given a start in casting. Damp sand will not slide
down a chute with a slope of 1½ in 1.

A wet cement grout will flow down a smooth plank chute, with a slope of
1 in 4 ft., and wet concrete will move on the same slope; comparatively
dry concrete requires a slope of nearly 1 in 1, or 45°, to secure free
movement. Mr. W. J. Douglas gives the following examples of conveying
concrete by chute, prefaced by the statement that his experience
indicates that concrete can thus be conveyed considerable distances
without material injury if proper precautions are taken.

In the first case a semi-circular steel trough about 2 ft. wide and 1
ft. deep and 15 ft. long set on a slope of 45° was used. A lift gate of
sheet steel was set in the chute about 2 ft. from the upper end. The
concrete was allowed to accumulate behind this gate until a wheelbarrow
load was had, when the batch was let loose by lifting the gate and was
discharged into barrows at the bottom. In another case a vertical chute
15 ft. long, consisting of a 15-in. square box with a canvas end, was
used. The concrete was dumped into the chute in batches of about 8 cu.
ft.; two men at the bottom "cut down" the pile with hoes to keep it from
coning and causing separation of the stone. In a third case a continuous
mixer fed into a sheet iron lined rectangular chute about 2½ ft. wide
and 1 ft. deep, with a vertical drop of 60 ft. on a slope of 1 in 1, or
45°. A gate was fixed in the chute 2 ft. from the top and at the bottom
the chute fed into a pyramidal hopper 3 ft. square at the top, 1 ft.
square at the bottom and 4½ ft. deep. This hopper was provided with a
bottom gate and was set on legs so that its top was about 10 ft. above
ground. As the concrete filled in the hopper was raised and the chute
cut off. The hopper was kept full all the time and was discharged by
bottom gate and spout into wheelbarrows. In a fourth case the apparatus
shown by the sketch, Fig. 14, was used. The continuous mixer discharged
onto an 18-in. rubber conveyor belt on conical rollers and 18 ft. long.
The inner end of the conveyor frame was carried on the ground at the
edge of the pit and the outer end was supported by ropes from the top of
a gallows frame standing on the pit bottom. The belt discharged over end
into a vertical steel chute 12 ins. in diameter and 8 ft. long; this
chute was fastened to the conveyor frame. Encircling and overlapping the
12-in. chute was a second slightly larger chute suspended by means of
two ropes from the gallows frame. The bottom of this second chute was
kept about 6 ins. below the top edges of a pyramidal hopper like the one
described above. In operation the chutes and the hopper were kept filled
with concrete so that the only drop of the concrete was 3 ft. from the
conveyor belt into the topmost chute.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.--Belt Conveyor and Chute for Handling Concrete.]

Concrete may be handled in long flat chutes by stationing men along the
chute with shovels which they work like paddles to keep the mixture
moving. In one case concrete was so handled in a chute 200 ft. long
having a slope of 1 in 10 ft. The chute was a V-shaped trough made of
1×12-in. boards in sections 16 ft. long. The men paddling were stationed
10 ft. apart, so that with wages at $1.50 per day the cost would be 1½
cts. per cu. yd. for every 10 ft. the concrete was conveyed. In
connection with this particular work we are informed that a Eureka
continuous mixer was used. The gravel was dumped near the mixer and a
team hitched to a drag scraper delivered the gravel alongside the mixer.
Four men shoveled the gravel into the measuring hopper, but only two men
worked at a time, shoveling for a period of 15 minutes and then resting
for a corresponding period while the other two men worked. In this
manner the four men shoveled enough gravel to make 100 cu. yds. of
concrete per day. A fifth man opened the cement bags and kept the cement
hopper filled.

~METHODS OF CHARGING MIXERS.~--By charging is meant the process of
delivering raw materials from stock into the mixer. Several methods are
practiced and will be considered in the following order: (1) By gravity
from overhead bins; (2) by wheelbarrow or hand cart (a) to charging
chute and (b) to elevating charging hoppers; (3) by charging cars
operated by cable or other means; (4) by shoveling directly into mixer;
(5) by derricks or other hoists.

~Charging by Gravity from Overhead Bins.~--Chuting the sand and stone from
overhead bins to the charging hopper is a simple, rapid and economical
method of charging mixers. The bottoms of the bins should always be high
enough above the charging floor to give ample head room for men to move
about erect, and the length of chute may be anything reasonable more
than this that conditions such as the side hill delivery of material may
necessitate. When the mixer is located to one side of the bins the slope
of the chute will have to be watched. Broken stone or pebbles will move
on a comparatively flat slope but sand, particularly if damp, requires a
steep chute. The measuring hopper is best kept entirely independent of
the mixer so that it can be filled with a new charge while the mixer is
turning and discharging the preceding batch. One man can attend the sand
and cement chutes if they be conveniently arranged, and one man can open
and empty the cement bags if they be stacked close at hand. A third man
will level off the sand and stone in the measuring hopper and help in
the chuting. A gang of this size will easily measure up a charge every 2
minutes when no delays occur.

[Illustration: Fig. 15.--Side Hill Mixing Plant.]

A number of plants charging by gravity from overhead bins are described
in succeeding chapters and are referenced in the index. As a general
example a side hill plant of conventional construction is shown by Fig.
15. The trestle work was made of 12×12-in. timbers and was approximately
40 ft. in height. Three tracks occupy the top platform. Under each track
was a material bin; one on each side for gravel and a middle bin for
sand. The sand bin was divided by a partition into two compartments.
These bins discharged into two measuring hoppers one gravel bin and one
compartment of the sand bin into each hopper. Two cement chutes from the
top platform provided for the delivery of the cement to the mixers,
either directly from cars or from the cement storage house. The mixing
was done in two Smith No. 5 mixers, one under each measuring hopper, and
these mixers discharged by chutes into buckets on flat cars. Thus the
concrete materials brought directly from a siding in car load lots to
the top of the platform were handled entirely by gravity to the cars
delivering the mixed concrete to the work. The gang operating the mixing
plant, with the wages paid, was composed as follows: 1 foreman and
engineer at $3 per day, 1 fireman at $2 per day and 15 laborers at $1.50
per day. With this gang the two mixers turned out 400 cu. yds. of
concrete per day and, frequently, 800 cu. yds. in 24 hours. Taking these
figures the labor cost from raw materials in cars on the platform to
mixed concrete in cars on the delivery track was as follows:

1 foreman and engineer at $3            $ 3.00
1 fireman at $2                           2.00
15 laborers at $1.50                     22.50
                                         -----
Total labor                             $27.50

Assuming 400 cu. yds. output, this gives a cost of $27.50 ÷ 400 = 6.875
cts. per cu. yd.

~Charging with Wheelbarrows.~--The economics of wheelbarrow haulage are
discussed in some detail in Chapter III. For machine mixer work the
problem of loading, transporting and dumping is complicated by the
greater rapidity with which the mixing is done and by the necessity,
usually, of using inclines to reach the charging hopper level. The
incline cuts down the output of the wheelers or in other words makes
necessary a larger gang to handle the same amount of material.
Conditions being the same, the height of the charging chute of the mixer
determines the height of incline and the size of the charging gang, so
that a mixer with a high charging level costs more to charge with
wheelbarrows than does one with a low charging level. Exact figures of
the increased cost of a few feet extra elevation of the wheelbarrow
incline are not available, but some idea may be had from a brief
calculation. The materials for a cubic yard of concrete will weigh about
3,700 lbs., so that to raise the materials for 100 cu. yds. of concrete,
including weight of barrows, 1 ft. calls for about 400,000 ft. lbs. of
work. A man will do about 800,000 ft. lbs. of useful work in a day, so
that each foot of additional height of incline means an additional
half-day's work for one man.

Wheeling to elevating charging hoppers obviates the use of inclines.
Figure 19 shows a mixer equipped with such a hopper, and the arrangement
provided for other makes of mixer is much similar. When the hopper is
lowered ready to receive its load its top edge over which the
wheelbarrows are dumped is from 12 to 14 ins. above ground level. The
wheeling is all done on the level. The elevating bucket is operated by
the mixer engine and is usually detachable. Where mixers have to be
moved frequently, requiring the erection and moving of the incline each
time, an elevating charging hopper is particularly useful; it can be
hoisted clear of the ground and moved with the mixer, so that it is
ready to use the moment that the mixer is set at its new station.

While the ordinary wheelbarrow is generally used for charging, better
work can be done under some conditions by using special charging barrows
of larger capacity and dumping from the end and ahead of the wheel. Two
forms of charging barrow are shown by Figs. 16 and 17. The Acme barrow
will hold 4 cu. ft. and the Ransome barrow is made in 3 to 6 cu. ft.
capacities. Where inclines are necessary these barrows can often be
hauled up the incline by power. A sprocket chain in the plane of the
incline and operated by the mixer engine is an excellent arrangement. A
prong riveted to the rear face of the barrow and projecting downward is
"caught into" the chain, which pulls the barrow to the top, the man
following to dump and return for another load.

[Illustration: Fig. 16.--Forward Dump Charging Barrow, Sterling
Wheelbarrow Co.]

[Illustration: Fig. 17.--Forward Dump Charging Barrow, Ransome Concrete
Machinery Co.]

~Charging with Cars.~--Cars moved by cable, team or hand are a
particularly economic charging device when the mixer is located a little
distance from the stock piles or bins. Either separate cars for cement,
sand and stone, each holding the proper amount of its material for a
batch, can be used, or a single car containing enough of all three
materials for a batch. The last arrangement is ordinarily more
economical in time and labor, and in plant required. In either case the
car serves as the measuring hopper, there being no further proportioning
of the materials after they have been loaded into the car, and it must
be arranged for measuring. Usually all that is necessary, where one car
is used, is to mark the levels on the sides to which it is to be filled
with sand and then stone; the car is run to the sand stock and filled to
the level marked for sand and then to the stone stock and filled to the
level marked for stone. The cement may be added to the charge either
before or after it is run to the mixer as convenience in storing the
cement stock dictates. Instead of having marks to show the proper
proportions of sand and stone, the car is sometimes divided into two
compartments, one for each material and each holding the proper
proportion of its material when level full. This arrangement makes
proper proportioning somewhat more certain, since the men charging the
car cannot over-run the marks. In case separate cars are used for each
material, they are simply filled level full or to mark, and dumped in
succession into the feeding hopper. Trestle and car plant construction
and costs are given in a preceding section.

~Charging by Shoveling.~--Charging by shoveling directly into the mixer is
seldom practiced except in street work with continuous mixers or in
charging gravity mixers of the trough type. Shoveling is not an economic
method of handling materials where the work involves carrying in
shovels, and it is only in a few classes of concrete work or in
isolated, exceptional cases that charging with shovels does not involve
carrying. The amount of material that men will load with shovels is
given in Chapter III, and the reader who wishes a full discussion of the
subject is referred to Gillette and Hauer, "Earth Excavation and
Embankments; Methods and Cost."

In charging continuous mixers with shovels the usual practice for mixers
without automatic feed devices is to work from a continuous stock pile
of sand, stone and cement spread in layers in the proper proportions.
The shoveling is done in such a manner that each shovelful contains a
mixture of cement, sand and stone, and so that the rate of delivery to
the mixer is as uniform as possible. In charging mixers having automatic
feed devices the sand and stone are simply shoveled into the sand and
stone hoppers, whence they are fed automatically to the mixer. In
charging gravity mixers by shoveling the method is essentially the same;
the cement, sand and stone properly proportioned are spread in layers on
the shoveling board at the head of the mixer and the mixture then
shoveled into the mixer. In both of these cases mixing is performed to a
certain extent by the shoveling, and in both the provision of the
combination stock pile from which the men work involves labor which
comes within the meaning of the term charging as we have used it here.
Examples of street work in which the mixers were charged by shoveling
are given in Chapter XIV.

~Charging with Derricks.~--When the stock piles are located close to the
mixer and the plant is fixed or is not frequently moved derricks can be
used economically for charging, particularly if the mixer be elevated so
that inclines become expensive. The following mode of operation will be
found to work well: Set the derrick so that its boom "covers" the sand
and stone piles and the mixer, and provide it with three buckets so that
there will always be one bucket at the stone pile and another at the
sand pile while the third is being handled. The derrick swinging from
the mixer, where it has discharged a bucket, drops the empty bucket at
the stone pile and picks up the bucket standing there, which has
received its proper charge of stone, and swings it to the sand pile and
drops it to get its charge of sand. Here it picks up the bucket standing
at the sand pile and which has its charges of both stone and sand, and
swings it to the mixer. By this arrangement the work of the derrick and
of the men filling the buckets is practically continuous. The buckets
can be provided with marks on the inside to show the proper points to
which to fill the stone and the sand or a partition may be riveted in
making a compartment for sand and another for stone. A special
charging-bucket that is arranged with a wheel and detachable handles
which permit it to be handled like a wheelbarrow is shown by Fig. 18.
This bucket can be used to advantage where the stock piles are too far
from the mixer for the derrick to reach both, the bucket being loaded
and wheeled to within reach of the derrick.

[Illustration: Fig. 18.--Charging Bucket With Wheel and Detachable
Handle.]

~TYPES OF MIXERS.~--There are two types of concrete mixing machines or
concrete mixers as they are more commonly called: (1) Batch mixers and
(2) continuous mixers. In mixers of the first type a charge of cement,
sand, aggregate and water is put into the machine which mixes and
discharges the batch before taking in another charge; charging, mixing
and discharging is done in batches. In continuous mixers the cement
sand, stone and water are charged into the machine in a continuous
stream and the mixed concrete is discharged in another continuous
stream. While all concrete mixers are either batch or continuous mixers,
it is common practice because of their distinctive character to separate
gravity mixers, whether batch or continuous, into a third type. In
gravity mixers the concrete materials are made to mingle by falling
through specially constructed troughs, or tubes, or hoppers. We shall
describe mixers in this chapter as (1) batch mixers, (2) continuous
mixers, and (3) gravity mixers. No attempt will be made, however, to
describe all or even all the leading mixers of each type; a
representative mixer or two of each type will be described, enough to
give an indication of the range of practice, and the reader referred to
manufacturers' literature for further information.

~Batch Mixers.~--Batch mixers are made in two principal forms which may be
designated as tilting and non-tilting mixers. In the first form the
mixer drum is tilted as one would tilt a bucket of water to discharge
the batch. In non-tilting mixers the mixer drum remains in one position,
the batch being discharged by special mechanism which dips it out a
portion at a time. In both forms the charge is put into the mixer as a
unit and kept confined as a unit during the time of mixing, which may be
any period wished by the operator.

[Illustration: Fig. 19.--Chicago Improved Cube Concrete Mixer with
Elevating Charging Hopper.]

_Chicago Improved Cube Tilting Mixer._--Figure 19 shows the improved
cube mixer made by the Municipal Engineering & Contracting Co., Chicago,
Ill. The drum consists of a cubical box with rounded corners and edges.
This box has hollow gudgeons at two diagonally opposite corners and
these gudgeons are open as shown to provide for charging and
discharging. The box is rotated by gears meshing with a circumferential
rack midway between gudgeons and another set of gears operate to tilt
the mixer. The inside of the box is smooth, there being no deflectors,
as its shape is such as to fold the batch repeatedly and thus accomplish
the mixing.

[Illustration: Fig. 20.--Ransome Concrete Mixer.]

_Ransome Non-Tilting Mixer._--Figure 20 shows a representative
non-tilting mixer made by the Ransome Concrete Machinery Co., Dunellen,
N. J. It consists of a cylindrical drum riding on rollers and rotated by
a train of gears meshing with circumferential racks on the drum. The
drum has a circular opening at each end; a charging chute enters one
opening and a tilting discharge chute may be thrown into or out of the
opposite opening. The cylindrical shell of the drum is provided inside
with steel plate deflectors, which plow through and pick up and drop the
concrete mixture as the drum revolves. The shape and arrangement of the
deflectors are such that the batch is shifted back and forth axially
across the mixer. To discharge the batch the discharge chute is tilted
so that its end projects into the mixer, in which position the material
picked up by the deflectors drops back onto the chute and runs out. The
discharge chute being independent of the mixing drum it can be thrown
into and out of discharge position at will without stopping the rotation
of the drum, and so can discharge any part or all of the batch at once.
The top edge of the charging chute ranges from 30½ to 38 ins. in height
above the top of the frame, varying with the size of the mixer.

[Illustration: Fig. 21.--Smith Concrete Mixer.]

_Smith Tilting Mixer._--Figure 21 shows a tilting mixer, known as the
Smith mixer, made by the Contractors' Supply & Equipment Co., Chicago,
Ill. The drum consists of two truncated cones with their large ends
fastened together and their small ends open for receiving the charge and
discharge of the batch. The drum is operated by a train of gears meshing
into a rack at mid-length where the cones join. In addition there is
another set of gears which tilt the drum to make the concrete flow out
of the discharge end. The inside of the drum is provided with steel
plate deflectors, which plow through and pick and drop the concrete
mixture shifting it back and forth axially in the process.

~Continuous Mixers.~--Continuous mixers are those in which the cement,
sand and stone are fed to the charging hopper in a continuous stream and
the mixed concrete is discharged in another continuous stream. They are
built in two principal forms. In one form the cement, sand and stone
properly proportioned are shoveled directly into the mixing drum. In the
other form these materials are dumped into separate charging hoppers and
are automatically fed into the mixing drum in any relative proportions
desired. One form of continuous mixer with automatic feed is described
in the succeeding paragraph and another form is described in Chapter
XIV. The continuous mixer without automatic feed consists simply of a
trough with a rotating paddle shaft and its driving mechanism. The
charging, the mixing and the discharging are done in what is virtually a
succession of very small batches.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.--Eureka Automatic Feed Continuous Mixer.]

_Eureka Automatic Feed Mixer._--Figure 22 shows the construction of the
continuous mixer built by the Eureka Machine Co., Lansing, Mich. The
cement bin and feeder is the small one in the foreground. There is a
pocketed cylinder revolving between concave plates, opening into the
hopper above, from which the pockets in the feeder are filled, and
discharging directly into the mixing trough below. Back of this is
shown the feeder for sand or gravel up to 2-in. screen size. This is a
pocketed cylinder similar to that used in the cement feeder, except that
it is larger, and instead of being provided on the discharge side with a
concave plate, is surmounted by a roller, held by springs. This serves
to cut off the excessive flow of material, but provides sufficient
flexibility to allow the rough coarse material to be fed through the
machine without its catching. The feeder for crushed stone is a similar
construction on larger lines, to handle material up to 3-in. size. These
several feeders can be set to give any desired mixture. On any material
fit to be used in concrete, they will measure with an error of less than
5 per cent., an agitator being provided in the sand bin to prevent damp
sand from bridging over the feeder, and preventing its action. The mixer
consists of a trough, with a square shaft, on which are mounted 37
mixing paddles, which are slipped on in rotation, so as to form
practically a continuous conveyor, but as each paddle is distinct, and
is shaped like the mold board of a plow, the material, as it passes from
one to the next, is turned over and stirred. Water is sprayed into the
mass at the center of the trough. The result is a dry mix, followed by a
wet mix. The mixing trough is made of heavy gage steel, well reinforced,
and practically indestructible. To take care of the discharge of
material while changing wheelbarrows, a hood is provided on the
discharge end of the machine, which can be lowered, and will hold about
a wheelbarrow load.

~Gravity Mixers.~--Gravity mixers are constructed in two general forms.
The first form is a trough whose bottom or sides or both are provided
with pegs, deflectors or other devices for giving the material a zig-zag
motion as it flows down the trough. The second form consists of a series
of hoppers set one above the other so that the batch is spilled from one
into the next and is thus mixed.

The chief advantage claimed for gravity mixers is that no power is
required to operate them. This is obviously so only in the sense that
gravity mixers have no power-operated moving mechanism, and the fact
should not be overestimated. The cost of power used in the actual
performance of mixing is a very small item. The distance between feed
and discharge levels is always greater for gravity mixers than for
machine mixers, and the power required to raise the concrete materials
the excess height may easily be greater than the power required to
operate a machine mixer. On the other hand the simplicity of the gravity
mixer insures low maintenance costs.

_Gilbreth Trough Mixer._--Figure 23 shows the construction of one of the
best known makes of gravity mixers of the trough form. In operation the
cement, sand and stone in the proper proportions are spread in
superimposed layers on a shoveling board at hopper level and are then
shoveled as evenly as possible into the hopper. From the hopper the
materials flow down the trough, receiving the water about half way down,
and are mixed by being cut and turned by the pins and deflectors. The
trough of the mixer is about 10 ft. long.

[Illustration: Fig. 23.--Gilbreth Gravity Mixer, Trough Form.]

[Illustration: Fig. 24.--Hains Gravity Mixer, Fixed Hopper Form.]

_Hains Gravity Mixer._--The form of gravity mixer made by the Hains
Concrete Mixer Co., Washington, D. C., is shown by Figs. 24 and 25. The
charge passes through the hoppers in succession. Considering first the
stationary plant, shown by Fig. 24, the four hoppers at the top have a
combined capacity of one of the lower hoppers. Each top hopper is
charged with cement, sand and stone in the order named and in the proper
proportions. Water is then dashed over the tops of the filled hoppers
and they are dumped simultaneously into the hopper next below. This
hopper is then discharged into the next and so on to the bottom.
Meanwhile the four top hoppers have been charged with materials for
another batch. It will be observed that (1) the concrete is mixed in
separate batches and (2) the ingredients making a batch are accurately
proportioned and begin to be mixed for the whole batch at once. The best
arrangement is to have the top of the hopper tower carry sand and stone
bins which chute directly into the top hoppers. In the telescopic mixer
shown by Fig. 25 the purpose has been to provide a mixer which, hung
from a derrick or cableway, will receive a charge of raw materials at
stock pile and deliver a batch of mixed concrete to the work, the
operation of mixing being performed during the hoist to the work. By
providing two mixers so that one can be charged while the other is being
hoisted continuous operation is secured. The following are records of
operation of stationary gravity mixers of this type.

[Illustration: Fig. 25.--Hains Gravity Mixer, Telescoping Hopper Form.]

In building a dock at Baltimore, Md., a plant consisting of two large
hoppers and four charging hoppers with sand and stone bins above was
used. One man at each large conical hopper tending the gates and two men
charging the four pyramidal hoppers composed the mixer gang. A scow load
of sand and another of stone were moored alongside the work and a
clam-shell bucket dredge loaded the material from these barges into the
mixer bins. Each batch was 25 cu. ft. of 1-2-5 concrete rammed in place.
The men at the upper hoppers would empty a sack of cement in each, and
then by opening gates in the bottom of the bins above, allow the
necessary amounts of sand and stone to flow in, marks having been
previously made on the sides of the hoppers to show the correct
proportion of each of the ingredients. The amount of water found by
experience to be necessary, would then be dashed into the hoppers, and
the charges allowed to run into the first cone hopper below. Refilling
would begin at the top while the men were caring for the first charge in
the lower hoppers. The process was thus continuous. The concrete was
chuted directly into place from the bottom hopper. The record of output
was 110 batches per 10-hour day. Wages of common labor were $1.50 per
day. The labor cost per cubic yard of concrete in place was 35 cts.

In constructing the Cedar Grove reservoir at Newark, N. J., a Hains
mixer made the following records of output:

                                           Cu. yds.
Best output per 10-hour day                     403
Average daily output for best month             302
Average daily output for whole job              225

The stone, sand and cement were all raised by bucket elevators to the
top of the high wooden tower that supported the bins and mixer. There
were 10 men operating the mixer so that (exclusive of power, interest
and depreciation) the labor cost of mixing averaged only 7 cts. per cu.
yd.; during one month it was as low as 5 cts. per cu. yd. This does not
include delivering the materials to the men at the mixer, nor does it
include conveying the concrete away and placing it. The work was done by
contract.

~OUTPUT OF MIXERS.~--With a good mixer the output depends upon the methods
of conveying the materials to and from the mixer. Most makers of mixers
publish capacities of their machines in batches or cubic yards output
per hour; these figures may generally be taken as stating nearly the
maximum output possible. Considering batch mixers, as being the type
most commonly used, it may be assumed that where the work is well
organized and no delay occurs in delivering the materials to the mixer
that a batch every 2 minutes, or 300 batches in 10 hours, will be
averaged, and there are a few records of a batch every 1½ minutes.

To illustrate to how great an extent the output of a mixer depends on
the methods adopted in handling the materials to and from the mixer we
compare two actual cases that came under the authors' observation. The
mixers used were of the same size and make. In one case the stone was
shoveled into the charging hopper by four men and the sand and cement
were delivered in barrows by four other men; six men took the concrete
away in wheelbarrows. The output of the mixer was one batch every 5
minutes, or 120 batches, or 60 cu. yds., in 10 hours. In the other case
the sand and the stone were chuted directly into the charging hopper
from overhead bins and the mixer discharged into one-batch buckets on
cars. The output of the mixer was one batch every 2 minutes, or 300
batches in 10 hours. In the first case the capacity of the mixer was
limited by the ability of a gang of workable size to get the raw
materials to and the mixed concrete away from the mixer. In the second
case the capacity was limited only by the amount of mixing deemed
necessary.

While the necessity of rapid charging of a mixer to secure its best
output is generally realized it is often forgotten that the rapidity of
discharge is also a factor of importance. The size of the conveyor by
which the concrete is removed affects the time of discharge. By timing a
string of wheelbarrows in line the authors have found that it takes
about 7 seconds to fill each barrow; as a rule slight delays will
increase this time to 10 seconds. With a load of 1 cu. ft. per barrow it
requires 13 barrow loads to take away a ½ cu. yd. batch. This makes the
time of discharging a batch 130 seconds, or say 2 minutes. The same
mixer discharging into a batch size bucket will discharge in 15 to 20
seconds, saving at least 1½ minutes in discharging each batch.

~MIXER EFFICIENCY.~--Various attempts have been made to rate the
efficiency of concrete mixers. In all cases a percentage basis of
comparison has been adopted; arbitrary values are assigned to the
several functions of a mixer, such as 40 per cent. for perfect mixing,
10 per cent. for time of mixing and 25 per cent. for control of water,
the total being 100 per cent., and each mixer analyzed and given a
rating according as it is considered to approach the full value of any
function. Such percentage ratings are unscientific and misleading; they
present definite figures for what are mere arbitrary determinations. The
values assigned to the several functions are purely arbitrary in the
first place, and in the second place the decision as to how near those
values any mixer approaches are matters of personal judgment.

_The most efficient mixer is the one that gives the maximum product of
standard quality at the least cost for production._

This rule recognizes the fact that in practical construction different
standards of quality are accepted for different kinds of work. No
engineer demands, for example, the same quality of mixture for a
pavement base that he does for a reinforced concrete girder. If mixer A
turns out concrete of a quality suitable for pavement base cheaper than
does mixer B, then it is the more efficient mixer for the purpose, even
though mixer B will make the superior quality of concrete required for a
reinforced girder while mixer A will not. This method of determining
efficiency holds accurate for any standard of quality that may be
demanded.




CHAPTER V.

METHODS AND COST OF DEPOSITING CONCRETE UNDER WATER AND OF SUBAQUEOUS
GROUTING.


Mixed concrete if emptied loose and allowed to sink through water is
destroyed; the cement paste is washed away and the sand and stone settle
onto the bottom more or less segregated and practically without
cementing value. In fact, if concrete is deposited with the utmost care
in closed buckets and there is any current to speak of a considerable
portion of cement is certain to wash out of the deposited mass. Even in
almost still water some of the cement will rise to the surface and
appear as a sort of milky scum, commonly called _laitance_. Placing
concrete under water, therefore, involves the distinctive task of
providing means to prevent the washing action of the water. It is also
distinguished from work done in air by the fact that it cannot be
compacted by ramming, but the main problem is that of preventing wash
during and after placing.

~DEPOSITING IN CLOSED BUCKETS.~--Special buckets for depositing concrete
under water are made by several manufacturers of concrete buckets. These
buckets vary in detail but are all similar in having doors to close the
concrete away from the water and, generally, in being bottom dumping.

The bucket shown by Fig. 26 was designed by Mr. John F. O'Rourke, and is
built by the Cockburn Barrow & Machine Co., of Jersey City, N. J. This
bucket was used in depositing the concrete for the City Island Bridge
foundations described in Chapter XII and also in a number of other
works. It consists of a nearly cubical shell of steel open at top and
bottom, and having heavy timbers rivetted around the bottom edges. The
open top has two flat flap doors. Two similar doors hinged about midway
of the sides close to form a V-shaped hopper bottom inside the shell and
serve when open, to close the openings in the sides of the shell. In
loading the bucket the bottom doors are drawn inward and upward by the
chains and held by a temporary key. The loaded bucket is then lifted by
the bail and the key removed, since when suspended the pull on the bail
holds the chains taut and the doors closed. As soon as the bucket rests
on the bottom the pull of the concrete on the doors slides the bail down
and the doors swing downward and back discharging the concrete. The
timbers around the bottom edges keep the bucket from sinking into the
deposited concrete, and the doors and shell exclude all water from the
batch until it is finally in place.

[Illustration: Fig. 26.--O'Rourke Bucket fur Depositing Concrete Under
Water.]

The subaqueous concrete bucket shown by Figs. 27 and 28 is made by the
Cyclopean Iron Works Co., Jersey City, N. J. Fig. 27 shows the bucket
suspended full ready for lowering; the cover is closed and latched and
the bail is held vertical by the tag line catch A. Other points to be
noted are the eccentric pivoting of the bail, the latch unlocking lever
and roller B and C, and the stop D. In the position shown the
bucket is lowered through the water and when at the proper depth just
above bottom the tag line is given a sharp pull, uncatching the bail.
The body of the bucket turns bottom side up, revolving on the bail
pivots, and just as the revolution is completed the bail engages the
roller C on the latch unlocking lever and swings the lever enough to
unlatch the top and allow it to swing down as shown by Fig. 28 and
release the concrete. The stop D keeps the body of the bucket from
swinging beyond the vertical in dumping.

[Illustration: Fig. 27.--Cyclopean Bucket for Depositing Concrete Under
Water (Closed Position).]

[Illustration: Fig. 28.--Cyclopean Bucket for Depositing Concrete Under
Water (Open Position).]

Figures 29 and 30 show the subaqueous concrete bucket made by the G. L.
Stuebner Iron Works, Long Island City, N. Y., essentially the same
bucket, omitting the cover and with a peaked bail, is used for work in
air. For subaqueous work the safety hooks A are lifted from the angles
B and wired to the bail in the position shown by the dotted lines, and
a tag line is attached to the handle bar C. The bucket being filled
and the cover placed is lowered through the water to the bottom and then
discharged by a pull on the tag line.

~DEPOSITING IN BAGS.~--Two methods of depositing concrete in bags are
available to the engineer; one method is to employ a bag of heavy tight
woven material, from which the concrete is emptied at the bottom, the
bag serving like the buckets previously described simply as means of
conveyance, and the other method is to use bags of paper or loose woven
gunnysack which are left in the work, the idea being that the paper will
soften or the cement will ooze out through the openings in the cloth
sufficiently to bond the separate bagfuls into a practically solid mass.

[Illustration: Fig. 29.--Stuebner Bucket for Depositing Concrete Under
Water (Closed Position).]

[Illustration: Fig. 30.--Stuebner Bucket for Depositing Concrete Under
Water (Open Position).]

[Illustration: Fig. 31.--Bag for Depositing Concrete Under Water.]

[Illustration: Fig. 32.--Form for Molding Footing for Block Concrete
Breakwater.]

The bag shown by Fig. 31 was used to deposit concrete for leveling up a
rough rock bottom and so provide a footing for a concrete block pier
constructed in 1902 at Peterhead, N. B., by Mr. William Shield, M. Inst.
C. E. Careful longitudinal profiles were taken of the rock bottom one at
each edge of the footing. Side forms were then made in 20-ft. sections
as shown by Fig. 32; the lagging boards being cut to fit the determined
profile and the top of the longitudinal piece being flush with the top
of the proposed footing. The concrete was filled in between the side
forms and leveled off by the T-rail straight-edge. In placing the side
forms the longitudinal pieces were placed by divers who were given the
proper elevations by level rods having 10 to 15-ft. extension pieces to
raise the targets above the water surface. When leveled the side pieces
were anchor-bolted as shown to the rock, the anchor-bolts being wedged
into the holes to permit future removal. The concrete was then lowered
in the bag shown by Fig. 31, the divers assisting in guiding the bag to
position. The mouth of the bag being tied by one turn of a line having
loops through which a wooden key is slipped to hold the line tight, a
sharp tug on the tripping rope loosens the key and empties the bag. The
bags used on this work had a capacity of 2¼ cu. ft. To permit the
removal of the side forms after the concrete had hardened, a strip of
jute sacking was spread against the lagging boards with a flap
extending 15 to 18 ins. under the concrete. The forms were removed by
divers who loosened the anchor bolt wedges.

In placing small amounts of concrete for bridge foundations in Nova
Scotia, bags, made of rough brown paper were used to hold the concrete.
Each bag held about 1 cu. ft. The bags were made up quickly and dropped
into the water one after the other so that the following one was
deposited before the cement escaped from the former one. The paper was
immediately destroyed by submersion and concrete remained. The bags cost
$1.35 per hundred or 35 cts. per cu. yd. of concrete. Concrete was thus
deposited in 18 ft. of water without a diver.

[Illustration: Fig. 33.--Steel Tremie for Depositing Concrete Under
Water.]

~DEPOSITING THROUGH A TREMIE.~--A tremie consists of a tube of wood or,
better, of sheet metal, which reaches from above the surface to the
bottom of the water; it is operated by filling the tube with concrete
and keeping it full by successive additions while allowing the concrete
to flow out gradually at the bottom by raising the tube slightly to
provide the necessary opening. A good example of a sheet steel tremie is
shown by Fig. 33. This tremie was used by Mr. Wm. H. Ward in
constructing the Harvard Bridge foundations and numerous other
subaqueous structures of concrete. In these works the tube was suspended
from a derrick. Wheelbarrows filled the tube and hopper with concrete
and kept them full; the derrick raised the tube a few inches and swung
it gently so as to move it slowly over the area to be filled. Care being
taken to keep the tube at one height, the concrete was readily deposited
in even layers. Concrete thus deposited in 18 ft. of water was found to
be level and solid on pumping the pit dry.

[Illustration: Fig. 34.--Tremie and Traveler Used at Charlestown, Mass.,
Bridge.]

Another method of handling a tremie was employed in constructing the
foundations for the Charlestown Bridge at Boston, Mass. Foundation piles
were driven and sawed off under water. A frame was built above water and
supported by a curbing attached to certain piles in the outer rows of
the foundation reserved for this purpose. In this frame the vertical
members were Wakefield sheet-piling plank, spaced 6 to 10 ft. apart, and
connected by three lines of double waling bolted to the verticals at
three different heights. This frame was lowered to the bottom so as to
enclose the bearing piles. The posts or verticals were then driven, one
by one, into the bottom, the frame being flexible enough to permit this.
The spaces between the posts or verticals were then filled by
sheet-piling and the frame was bolted to the curbing piles. This curbing
afterward supported the traveler used in laying the concrete. Thus a
coffer dam was formed to receive the concrete as shown in Fig. 34. The
1-2-5 concrete was deposited up to within 5½ ft. of the mean low water
level, the last foot being laid after water was pumped out. The tremie
used to deposit the concrete was a tube 14 ins. in diameter at the
bottom and 11 ins. at the neck, with a hopper at the top. It was made in
removable sections, with outside flanges, and was suspended by a
differential hoist from a truck moving laterally on a traveler, Fig. 34.
The foot of the chute rested on the bottom until filled with concrete;
then the chute was slowly raised and the concrete allowed to run but
into a conical heap, more concrete being dumped into the hopper. As the
truck moved across the traveler a ridge of concrete was made; then the
traveler was moved forward and another parallel ridge was made. The best
results were obtained when the layers were 2½ ft. thick, but layers up
to 6 ft. thick were laid. If the layer was too thick, or uneven, or if
the chute was moved or raised too quickly, the charge in the tube was
"lost." This was objectionable because the charging of the chute anew
resulted in "washing" the cement more or less out of the concrete until
the chute was again filled. To reduce this objection the contractor was
directed to dump some neat cement into the tube before filling with
concrete. A canvass piston was devised which could be pushed ahead of
the concrete when filling the chute. It consisted of two truncated cones
of canvass, one flaring downward to force the water ahead, and the other
flaring upward to hold the concrete. The canvass was stiffened and held
against the sides of the chute by longitudinal ribs of spring steel
wire; the waist was filled by a thick block of wood to which all the
springs were attached; and to this block were connected additional steel
guides to prevent overturning and a rope to regulate the descent. Very
little water forced its way past this piston and it was a success, but
as the cost was considerable and a piston was lost each time, its use
was abandoned as the evil to be avoided did not justify the outlay.

The chute worked best when the concrete was mixed not quite wet enough
to be plastic. If mixed too wet the charge was liable to be "lost," and
if dry it would choke the chute. An excess of gravel permitted water to
ascend in the tube; and an excess of sand tended to check the flow of
concrete.

In constructing the piers for a masonry arch bridge in France in 1888
much the same method was followed, except that a wooden tremie 16 ins.
square made in detachable sections was used. This tremie had a hopper
top and was also provided with a removable cap or cover for the bottom
end, the latter device being intended to keep the water out of the tube
and prevent "washing" the first charge of concrete. The piers were
constructed by first driving piles and sawing them off several feet
above the bottom but below water level, and then filling them nearly to
their tops with broken stone. An open box caisson was then sunk onto the
stone and embracing the pile tops and then filled around the outside
with more broken stone. The caisson was then filled with concrete
through the tremie which was handled by a traveling crane. The crane was
mounted and traveled transversely of the pier on a platform which in
turn moved along tracks laid lengthwise of the caisson. The tube was
gradually filled with concrete and lowered, the detachable bottom of the
tube was then removed, allowing the concrete to run out. The tube was
first moved across the caisson and then downstream and back across the
caisson, and this operation repeated until a 16-in. layer was completed.
The tube was then raised 16 ins. and the operations repeated to form
another layer. There was almost no _laitance_. From 90 to 100 cu. yds.
were deposited daily.

Still another example of tremie work is furnished by the task of
depositing a large mass of concrete under water in the construction of
the Nussdorf Lock at Vienna. This lock has a total width of 92 ft. over
all, and is 49.2 ft. clear inside. The excavation, which was carried to
a depth of 26.24 ft. below water level, was made full width, between
sheet piling, and the bottom was filled in with rammed sand and gravel,
forming a kind of invert with its upper surface horizontal in the middle
and sloping upwards a trifle at both sides. A mass of concrete having a
total thickness of 13.12 ft. was built on this foundation in the center
where the upper surfaces were 13.12 ft. below the water level. Concrete
walls were carried up at the sides of the lock to a height of 3.28 ft.;
these walls were 8.2 ft. thick. The methods used in placing the concrete
were as follows: Three longitudinal rows of piles were driven on each
side of the axis of the lock, these piles supporting a 6-rail track
about 7 ft. above the water level. Three carriages spanning the full
width of the lock transversely moved on this track. Each carriage had
three trolleys, one in each of the main panels of the transverse pile
bends. These trolleys each carried a vertical telescopic tube, by means
of which the concrete was deposited at the bottom of the lock. These
tubes or chutes were of different lengths in the three carriages; the
first ones deposited the concrete up to a level of 23 ft. below the
surface; the next set deposited the concrete between that level and 19.7
ft., and the last set completed the subaqueous work up to the final
height of 16.4 ft. below the surface. The tops of the tubes were level
with a transverse track extending the full length of the carriage. The
ends of these tracks just cleared the outside rows of piles, which, on
one side of the lock, supported a distribution track parallel to the
axis of the lock. Dump cars running on this distribution track delivered
the concrete to smaller dump cars on the carriage tracks, and in turn
these smaller cars dumped into either of these chutes on each carriage.
The carriages were moved from end to end of the lock, the whole area of
the lock coming under the nine chutes, inasmuch as each chute moved
one-third the length of the carriage. The concrete was deposited in
three horizontal layers 3.28 ft. thick, the layers being built in
comparatively narrow banks, so that the different layers would key
together and form a corrugated mass. The chutes were shortened as the
concrete was deposited, three layers being placed successively. The main
body of the bottom and the side walls were built by this method, and
then the water was pumped out and a 2.3 ft. layer of concrete rammed
over the bottom and completed with a finished surface 9 ft. thick.

~GROUTING SUBMERGED STONE.~--Masses of gravel, broken or rubble stone
deposited under water may be cemented into virtually a solid concrete by
charging the interstices with grout forced through pipes from the
surface. Mr. H. F. White gives the following records of grouting
submerged gravel:

In experiment No. 1 a reservoir 10 ft. square was filled to a depth of
18 ins. with clean gravel ballast (1½ to 2-in. size) submerged in water.
A 2-in. gas pipe rested on the gravel and was surmounted with a funnel.
A 1:1 Portland grout was poured in. After 21 days set the water was
drawn off, and it was found that the grout had permeated the ballast
for a space of 8 ft. square at the bottom and 6 ft. square at the top,
leaving a small pile of pure cement mortar 6 ins. high about the base of
the pipe; 16 cu. ft. of cement and 16 cu. ft. of sand concreted 100 cu.
yds. of ballast. In experiment No. 2, under the same conditions, a grout
made of 1 part lime, 1 part surki (puzzulana or trass) and 1 part sand,
was found to have spread over the entire bottom, 10 ft. square, rising 5
ins. on the sides, and making the concreted mass about 3½ ft. square at
the top; 25 cu. ft. of the dry materials concreted 100 cu. ft. of
ballast. In experiment No. 3 the ballast was 2½ ft. deep. A grout (using
8 cu. ft. of each ingredient) made as in experiment No. 2 covered the
bottom, rose 14 ins. on the sides and made a top surface 4½ ft. square;
32 cu. ft. of the dry materials grouted 100 cu. ft. of ballast. In
experiment No. 4 the ballast was of bats and pieces 3 or 4 ins. in size
laid 7 ft. deep. A grout made as in experiment No. 2 (using 88 cu. ft.
of each ingredient) concreted the whole mass to a depth of 6 ft. up the
sides, and 2½ ft. square at the pipe on the surface of the ballast. Mr.
White says that a grout containing more than 1 part of sand to 1 of
Portland cement will not run freely through a 2-in. pipe, as the sand
settles out and chokes the pipe. Even with 1:1 grout it must be
constantly stirred and a steady flow into the pipe maintained. The
lime-trass grout does not give the same trouble.

Mr. W. R. Knipple describes the work of grouting rubble stone and gravel
for the base of the Hermitage Breakwater. This breakwater is 525 ft.
long, 50 ft. wide at base and 42 ft. wide at top, and 68 ft. high, was
built on the island of Jersey. Where earth (from 0 to 8½ ft. deep)
overlaid the granite rock, it was dredged and the trench filled in with
rubble stones and gravel until a level foundation was secured. Cement
grout was then forced into this filling through pipe placed 8 to 10 ft.
apart. The grouting was done in sections 12½ ft. long, from 7 to 10 days
being taken to complete each. Upon this foundation concrete blocks,
4×4×9 to 12 ft., were laid in courses inclined at an angle of 68°. The
first four courses were laid by divers, the blocks being stacked dry two
courses high at a time. The joints below water were calked by divers and
above water by masons, and a section was then grouted. When two courses
had been laid and grouted, two more courses were laid and grouted in
turn, and so on. In places, grouting was done in 50 ft. of water. The
grout should be a thick paste; a 30-ft. column of grout will balance a
60-ft. column of water.




CHAPTER VI.

METHODS AND COST OF MAKING AND USING RUBBLE AND ASPHALTIC CONCRETE.


Two kinds of concrete which vary in composition and character from the
common standard mixtures of cement, sand and broken aggregate are
extensively employed in engineering construction. These are rubble
concrete and asphaltic concrete.

~RUBBLE CONCRETE.~--In constructing massive walls and slabs a reduction in
cost may often (not always) be obtained by introducing large stones into
the concrete. Concrete of this character is called rubble concrete, and
the percentage of rubble stone contained varies from a few per cent. to,
in some cases, over half of the volume. The saving effected comes partly
from the reduction in the cement required per cubic yard of concrete and
partly from the saving in crushing.

The saving in cement may be readily figured if the composition of the
concrete and the volume of the added rubble stones be known. A 1-2½-5
concrete requires according to Table X in Chapter II 1.13 bbls. of
cement per cubic yard. Assuming a barrel of cement to make 3.65 cu. ft.
of paste, we have 3.65 × 1.13 = 4.12 cu. ft. of cement paste per cubic
yard of 1-2½-5 concrete. This means that about 15 per cent. of the
volume of the concrete structure is cement. If rubble stone be
introduced to 50 per cent. of the volume, then the structure has about
7½ per cent. of its volume of cement. It is of interest to note in this
connection that rubble masonry composed of 65 per cent. stone and 35 per
cent. of 1-2½ mortar would have some 11½ per cent. of its volume made up
of cement.

The saving in crushing is not so simple a determination. Generally
speaking, the fact that a considerable volume of the concrete is
composed of what, we will call uncrushed stone, means a saving in the
stone constituent of one structure amounting to what it would have cost
to break up and screen this volume of uncrushed stone, but there are
exceptions. For example, the anchorages of the Manhattan Bridge over the
East River at New York city were specified to be of rubble concrete,
doubtless because the designer believed rubble concrete to be cheaper
than plain concrete. In this case an economic mistake was made, for all
the rubble stone used had to be quarried up the Hudson River, loaded
onto and shipped by barges to the site and then unloaded and handled to
the work using derricks. Now this repeated handling of large, irregular
rubble stones is expensive. Crushed stone as we have shown in Chapter IV
can be unloaded from boats at a very low cost by means of clam shells.
It can be transported on a belt conveyor, elevated by bucket conveyer,
mixed with sand and cement and delivered to the work all with very
little manual labor when the installation of a very efficient plant is
justified by the magnitude of the job. Large rubble stones cannot be
handled so cheaply or with so great rapidity as crushed stone; the work
may be so expensive, due to repeated handlings, as to offset the cost of
crushing as well as the extra cost of cement in plain concrete. On the
other hand, the cost of quarrying rock suitable for rubble concrete is
no greater than the cost of quarrying it for crushing--it is generally
less because the stone does not have to be broken so small--so that when
the cost of getting the quarried rock to the crusher and the crushed
stone into the concrete comes about the same as getting the quarried
stone into the structure it is absurd practice to require crushing. To
go back then to our first thought, the question whether or not saving
results from the use of rubble concrete, is a separate problem in
engineering economics for each structure.

In planning rubble concrete work the form of the rubble stones as they
come from the quarry deserves consideration. Stones that have flat beds
like many sandstones and limestones can be laid upon layers of dry
concrete and have the vertical interstices filled with dry concrete by
tamping. It requires a sloppy concrete to thoroughly embed stones which
break out irregularly. In the following examples of rubble concrete work
the reader will find structures varying widely enough in character and
in the percentages of rubble used to cover most ordinary conditions of
such work.

Where the rubble stones are very large it is now customary to use the
term "cyclopean masonry" instead of rubble concrete. Many engineers who
have not studied the economics of the subject believe that the use of
massive blocks of stone bedded in concrete necessarily gives the
cheapest form of masonry. We have already indicated conditions where
ordinary concrete is cheaper than rubble concrete. We may add that if
the quarry yields a rock that breaks up naturally into small sized
blocks, it is the height of economic folly to specify large sized
cyclopean blocks. Nevertheless this blunder has been frequently made in
the recent past.

[Illustration: Fig. 35.--Diagram Cross-Section of Rubble Concrete Dam,
Chattahoochee River.]

~Chattahoochee River Dam.~--The roll-way portion, 680 ft. long, of the dam
for the Atlanta Water & Electric Power Co., shown in section by Fig. 35,
was built of a hearting of rubble concrete with a fine concrete facing
and a rubble rear wall. The facing, 12 ins. thick of 1-2-4 concrete,
gave a smooth surface for the top and face of the dam, while the rubble
rear wall enabled back forms to be dispensed with and, it was
considered, made a more impervious masonry. The concrete matrix for the
core was a 1-2-5 stone mixture made very wet. The rubble stones, some as
large as 4 cu. yds., were bedded in the concrete by dropping them a few
yards from a derrick and "working" them with bars; a well formed stone
was readily settled 6 ins. into a 10-in. bed of concrete. The volume of
rubble was from 33 to 45 per cent. of the total volume of the masonry.
The 1-2-4 concrete facing was brought up together with the rubble core,
using face forms and templates to get the proper profile. The work was
done by contract and the average was 5,500 cu. yds. of concrete placed
per month.

[Illustration: Fig. 36.--Cross-Section of Barossa Dam of Rubble
Concrete.]

~Barossa Dam, South Australia.~--The Barossa Dam for the water-works for
Gawler, South Australia, is an arch with a radius of 200 ft., and an arc
length on top of 422 ft.; its height above the bed of the stream is 95
ft. Figure 36 is a cross-section of the dam at the center. The dam
contains 17,975 cu. yds. of rubble concrete in the proportions of 2,215
cu. yds. of rubble stone to 15,760 cu. yds. of concrete; thus about 12.3
per cent. of the dam was of rubble. The concrete was mixed by weight of
1 part cement, 1½ parts sand, and a varying proportion of aggregate
composed of 4½ parts 1¼ to 2-in. stone, 2 parts ½ to 1¼-in. stone and 1
part 1/8 to ½-in. stone or screenings. The sand was one-half river sand
and one-half crusher sand. The following shows the amounts by weight of
the several materials for each of the several classes of concrete per
cubic yard:

                       -------------Stone----------
Class. Excess Mortar.    1¼-2.      ½-1¼.    1/8-½.    Sand.  Cement.
  A         7.5%       1,500        661½     333¼       804    434
  B        12.5        1,433-1/3    637      318        858½   463
  C        12.5        1,434        637      318½       859    474
  D        15          1,402        623      312        884    484

[Illustration: Fig. 37.--Apparatus Used for Weighing Concrete Materials
at Barossa Dam.]

The average composition of the concrete was 1-1½-3½. Its cost per cubic
yard in place including rubble was 38s 9d per cu. yd. or about $9.30. In
proportioning the mixture on the work use was made of the device shown
by Fig. 37 to weigh the aggregate. The measuring car is pushed back
under the stone hopper chute until the wheels drop into shallow notches
in the balanced track rails; stone is then admitted until the lead
weight begins to rise, when the car is pushed forward and dumps
automatically as indicated.

~Other Rubble Concrete Dams.~--Rubble concrete containing from 55 to 60
per cent. rubble was used in constructing the Boonton Dam at Boonton, N.
J. The stones used measured from 1 to 2½ cu. yds. each; the concrete was
made so wet that when the stones were dropped into it, it flowed into
every crevice. The materials were all delivered on cars, from which they
were delivered to the dam by derricks provided with bull-wheels. On the
dam there were 4 laborers and 1 mason to each derrick, and this gang
dumped the concrete and joggled the rubble stones into it. Records of
125 cu. yds. per 10 hours, with one derrick, were made. With 35
derricks, 20 of which were laying masonry and 15 either passing
materials or being moved, as much as 21,000 cu. yds. of masonry were
laid in one month. The amount of cement per cubic yard of masonry is
variously stated to have been 0.6 to 0.75 bbl. The stone was granite.

The Spier Falls Dam on the upper Hudson River was built of rubble
concrete containing about 33 per cent. rubble stone. The concrete was a
1-2½-5 mixture, and the engineer states that about 1 bbl. of cement was
used per cubic yard of rubble concrete. This high percentage of cement
may be accounted for by the fact that there was a considerable amount of
rubble masonry in cement mortar included in the total. The stones and
concrete were delivered along the dam by cableways and stiff-leg
derricks set on the downstream sloping face of the dam delivered them
from the cableways into place. There were two laborers to each mason
employed in placing the materials, wages being 15 and 35 cts. per hour,
respectively. The labor cost of placing the materials was 60 cts. per
cubic yard of masonry. The stone was granite.

Granite rubble laid in layers on beds of concrete and filled between
with concrete was used in constructing the Hemet Dam in California. The
concrete was a 1-3-6 mixture, and was thoroughly tamped under and
between the stones. For face work the stones were roughly scabbled to
shape and laid in mortar. The stone was taken from the quarry 400 ft.
away and delivered directly on the dam by cableways; here two derricks
handled the stone into place, the dam being only 246 ft. arc length on
top, though it was 122½ ft. high. The cableways would take a 10-ton
load; stones could be taken from the quarry, hoisted 150 ft. and
delivered to the work in 40 to 60 seconds. Common labor at $1.75 per day
was used for all masonry except facing, where masons at $3.50 were
employed. Cement cost delivered $5 per barrel, of which from $1 to $1.50
per barrel was the cost of hauling 23 miles by team over roads having 18
per cent. grades in places. Sand was taken from the stream bed and
delivered to the work by bucket conveyor. "Under favorable conditions
some of the masonry was put in for as low as $4 per cu. yd." There were
31,100 cu. yds. of masonry in the dam, which required 20,000 bbls. of
cement, or 0.64 bbl. per cubic yard.

The following novel method of making rubble concrete was employed in
enlarging two old dams and in constructing two new dams for a small
water-works. The available time was short, the amount of work was too
small and too scattered to justify the installation of a stone crusher,
and suitable gravel was not at hand. Sufficient small boulders in old
walls, and borrow pits and on surface of fields were available, and were
used with thin Portland cement mortar. One part of Alpha or Lehigh
cement and three parts sand were mixed dry at first and then wet with
just enough water to make the resulting mortar flow by gravity. This
mortar was shoveled into the forms continuously by one set of men while
other men were throwing into the mortar in the forms the boulders which
were cleaned and broken so as not to be more than 7 ins. long. In
general the performance was continuous. Three mortar beds were placed
parallel with, and against, one side of the forms, with spaces of about
4 ft. between the ends of the beds. The boulders were dumped on the
opposite side of the forms. Two men shoveled in all the mortar and did
nothing else. While they were emptying one bed the mortar was being
mixed in the preceding bed by two other men and the materials placed in
the third bed by still others. Another gang was continually throwing in
the boulders and small stones and still another was breaking stone. One
man should keep the mortar well stirred while the bed is being emptied.
About 20 men were necessary to do all parts of the work. The forms were
of 2-in. planed plank tongued and grooved. Especial pains were taken to
make the forms tight, and all leaks that appeared were quickly stopped
with dry cement. Some pains were taken to prevent a flat side of large
stones from coming in direct contact with the forms, but round boulders
and small stones needed no care to prevent their showing in the finished
work.

[Illustration: Fig. 38.--Bridge Abutment of Rubble Concrete.]

In conclusion it is interesting to note, perhaps, the earliest use of
rubble concrete for dam construction in this country in constructing the
Boyd's Corner Dam on the Croton River near New York. This dam was begun
in 1867 and for a time rubble concrete was used, but was finally
discontinued, due to the impression that it might not be watertight. The
specifications called for dry concrete to be thoroughly rammed in
between the rubble stones, and to give room for this ramming the
contractor was not permitted to lay any two stones closer together than
12 ins. As a result not more than 33 per cent. of the concrete was
rubble.

~Abutment for Railway Bridge.~--Figure 38 shows a bridge abutment built of
rubble concrete at a cost of about $4.50 per cu. yd. The concrete was a
1-2½-4½ mixture laid in 4-in. layers. On each layer were laid large
rubble stones bedded flat and spaced to give 6-in. vertical joints; the
vertical joints were filled with concrete by ramming and then another
layer of concrete placed and so on. A force of 28 men and a foreman
averaged 40 cu. yds. of rubble concrete per day. The following is the
itemized cost per cubic yard, not including forms, for 278 cu. yds:

Item.                                       Per Cu. Yd.
0.82 bbls. cement, at $2.60                    $2.14
0.22 cu. yd. sand, at $1.00                     0.22
0.52 cu. yd. broken stone, at $0.94             0.49
0.38 cu. yd. rubble stone, at $0.63             0.24
Water                                           0.07
Labor, at 15 cts. per hour                      1.19
Foreman                                         0.09
                                             -------
Total                                          $4.44

~Some English Data on Rubble Concrete.~--Railway work, under Mr. John
Strain, in Scotland and Spain, involved the building of abutments, piers
and arches of rubble concrete. The concrete was made of 1 part cement to
5 parts of ballast, the ballast consisting of broken stone or slag and
sand mixed in proportions determined by experiment. The materials were
mixed by turning with shovels 4 times dry, then 4 times more during the
addition of water through a rose nozzle. A bed of concrete 6 ins. thick
was first laid, and on this a layer of rubble stones, no two stones
being nearer together than 3 ins., nor nearer the forms than 3 ins. The
stones were rammed and probed around with a trowel to leave no spaces.
Over each layer of rubble, concrete was spread to a depth of 6 ins. The
forms or molds for piers for a viaduct were simply large open boxes, the
four sides of which could be taken apart. The depth of the boxes was
uniform, and they were numbered from the top down, so, that, knowing the
height of a given pier, the proper box for the base could be selected.
As each box was filled, the next one smaller in size was swung into
place with a derrick. The following bridge piers for the Tharsis &
Calanas Railway were built:

                    Length     Height     No.    Cu. Yds.  Weeks
                      of         of       of       in       to
Name.               Bridge.    Piers.    Spans.   Piers.   Build.
                      Ft.       Ft.

Tamujoso River       435        28         12     1,737      14½
Oraque               423        31         11     1,590      15
Cascabelero          480     30 to 80      10     2,680      21
No. 16               294     28 to 50       7     1,046      16½
Tiesa                165     16 to 23       8       420       4

It is stated that the construction of some of these piers in ordinary
masonry would have taken four times as long. The rock available for
rubble did not yield large blocks, consequently the percentage of pure
concrete in the piers was large, averaging 70 per cent. In one case,
where the stones were smaller than usual, the percentage of concrete was
76½ per cent. In other work the percentage has been as low as 55 per
cent., and in still other work where a rubble face work was used the
percentage of concrete has been 40 per cent.

In these piers the average quantities of materials per cubic yard of
rubble concrete were:

448 lbs. (0.178 cu. yd.) cement.
0.36 cu. yd. sand.
0.68 cu. yd. broken stone (measured loose in piles).
0.30 cu. yd. rubble (measured solid).

Several railway bridge piers and abutments in Scotland are cited. In one
of these, large rubble stones of irregular size and weighing 2 tons each
were set inside the forms, 3 ins. away from the plank and 3 ins. from
one another. The gang to each derrick was: 1 derrick man and 1 boy, 1
mason and 10 laborers, and about one-quarter of the time of 1 carpenter
and his helper raising the forms. For bridges of 400 cu. yds., the
progress was 12 to 15 cu. yds. a day. The forms were left in place 10
days.

To chip off a few inches from the face of a concrete abutment that was
too far out, required the work of 1 quarryman 5 days per cu. yd. of
solid concrete chipped off.

Concrete was used for a skew arch over the River Dochart, on the Killin
Railway, Scotland. There were 5 arches, each of 30 ft. span on the
square or 42 ft. on the skew, the skew being 45°. The piers were of
rubble concrete. The concrete in the arch was wheeled 300 ft. on a
trestle, and dumped onto the centers. It was rammed in 6-in. layers,
which were laid corresponding to the courses of arch stones. As the
layers approached the crown of the arch, some difficulty was experienced
in keeping the surfaces perpendicular. Each arch was completed in a day.

In a paper by John W. Steven, in Proc. Inst. C. E., the following is
given:

                                    Rubble      Per Cent.
                      Concrete     Concrete     of Rubble
                        Per          Per        in Rubble
                      Cu. Yd.       Cu. Yd.      Concrete.
Ardrossan Harbor      $6.00        $5.00         20.0
Irvine Branch          7.00         3.68         63.6
Calanas & Tharsis Ry   7.08         3.43         30.3

Mr. Martin Murphy describes some bridge foundations in Nova Scotia.
Rubble concrete was used in some of the piers. The rubble concrete
consisted of 1 part cement, 2 parts sand, 1 part clean gravel, and 5
parts of large stones weighing 20 lbs. each and upwards. The sand,
cement and gravel were turned three times dry and three times wet, and
put into the forms. The rubble stones were bedded in the concrete by
hand, being set on end, 2 or 3 ins. apart. No rubble stones were placed
within 6 ins. of the forms, thus leaving a face of plain concrete; and
the rubble stones were not carried higher than 18 ins. below the top of
the pier. One cubic yard of this rubble concrete required 0.8 to 0.9
bbl. of cement.

~ASPHALT CONCRETE.~--Asphalt or tar concrete in which steam cinders or
broken stone or gravel and sand are mixed with asphaltum or tar instead
of cement paste are used to some extent in lining reservoirs,
constructing mill floors, etc. Such mixtures differ in degree only from
the mixtures used for asphalt street paving, for discussion of which the
various books on paving and asphalts should be consulted. The two
examples of asphalt concrete work given here are fairly representative
of the mixtures and methods employed for concrete work as distinguished
from asphalt work.

~Slope Paving for Earth Dam.~--Mr. Robert B. Stanton describes a small log
dam faced upstream with earth, upon which was laid an asphalt concrete
lining to make it water tight. The stone was broken to 2-in. pieces,
all the fines being left in and sufficient fine material added to fill
the voids. The stone was heated and mixed in pans or kettles from a
street paving outfit; and the asphaltum paste, composed of 4 parts
California refined asphaltum and 1 part crude petroleum, was boiled in
another kettle. The boiling hot paste was poured with ladles over the
hot stone, and the whole mixed over the fire with shovels and hoes. The
asphalt concrete was taken away in hot iron wheelbarrows, placed in a
4-in. layer rammed and ironed with hot irons. The concrete was laid in
strips 4 to 6 ft. wide, the edges being coated with hot paste. After the
whole reservoir was lined, it was painted with the asphalt paste, boiled
much longer, until when cold it was hard and stone was broken to 2-in.
pieces, all the fines being left in and sufficient fine material added
to fill the voids. The stone was heated and mixed in pans or kettles
from a street paving outfit; and the asphaltum paste, composed of 4
parts California refined asphaltum and 1 part crude petroleum, was
boiled in another kettle. The boiling hot paste was poured with ladles
over the hot stone, and the whole mixed over the fire with shovels and
hoes. The asphalt concrete was taken away in hot iron wheelbarrows,
placed in a 4-in. layer rammed and ironed with hot irons. The concrete
was laid in strips 4 to 6 ft. wide, the edges being coated with hot
paste. After the whole reservoir was lined, it was painted with the
asphalt paste, boiled much longer, until when cold it was hard and
brittle, breaking like glass under the hammer. This paste was put on
very hot and ironed down. It should not be more than {1/8}-in. thick or
it will "creep" on slopes of 1½ to 1. After two hot summers and one cold
winter there was not a single crack anywhere in the lining. A mixture of
sand and asphalt will creep on slopes of 1½ to 1, but asphalt concrete
will not. With asphalt at $20 a ton, and labor at $2 a day, the cost was
15 cts. a sq. ft. for 4-in. asphalt concrete. On a high slope Mr.
Stanton recommends making slight berms every 6 ft. to support the
concrete and prevent creeping. Asphalt concrete resists the wear of wind
and water that cuts away granite and iron.

~Base for Mill Floor.~--In constructing 17,784 sq. ft. of tar concrete
base for a mill floor, Mr. C. H. Chadsey used a sand, broken stone and
tar mixture mixed in a mechanical mixer. The apparatus used and the mode
of procedure followed were as follows:

Two parallel 8-in. brick walls 26 ft. long were built 4 ft. apart and 2½
ft. high to form a furnace. On these walls at one end was set a 4×6×2
ft. steel plate tar heating tank. Next to this tank for a space of 4×8
ft. the walls were spanned between with steel plates. This area was used
for heating sand. Another space of 4×8 ft. was covered with 1½ in. steel
rods arranged to form a grid; this space was used for heating the broken
stones. The grid proved especially efficient, as it permitted the hot
air to pass up through the stones, while a small cleaning door at the
ground allowed the screenings which dropped through the grid to be
raked out and added to the mixture. A fire from barrel staves and refuse
wood built under the tank end was sufficient to heat the tar, sand and
stone.

For mixing the materials a Ransome mixer was selected for the reason
that heat could be supplied to the exterior of the drum by building a
wood fire underneath. This fire was maintained to prevent the mixture
from adhering to the mixing blades, and it proved quite effective,
though occasionally they would have to be cleaned with a chisel bar,
particularly when the aggregate was not sufficiently heated before being
admitted to the mixer. A little "dead oil" applied to the discharge
chute and to the shovels, wheelbarrows and other tools effectually
prevented the concrete from adhering to them.

The method of depositing the concrete was practically the same as that
used in laying cement sidewalks. Wood strips attached to stakes driven
into the ground provided templates for gaging the thickness of the base
and for leveling off the surface. The wood covering consisted of a layer
of 2-in. planks, covered by matched hardwood flooring. In placing the
planking, the base was covered with a ¼-in. layer of hot pitch, into
which the planks were pressed immediately, the last plank laid being
toe-nailed to the preceding plank just enough to keep the joint tight.
After a few minutes the planks adhered so firmly to the base that they
could be removed only with difficulty. The hardwood surface was put on
in the usual manner. The prices of materials and wages for the work were
as follows:

Pitch, bulk, per lb.                     $ 0.0075
Gravel, per cu. yd.                        1.50
Spruce sub-floor, per M. ft. B. M.        15.00
Hardwood surface, per M. ft. B. M.        33.00
Laborers, per 10-hour day.                 1.50
Foreman, per 10-hour day.                  4.00
Carpenters, per 10-hour day.               2.00

At these prices and not including a small administration cost or the
cost of tools and plant, the cost of the floor consisting of 4½ ins. of
concrete, 2 ins. of spruce sub-flooring and 7/8-in. hardwood finish was
as follows per square foot:

Pitch                               $0.04
Gravel                               0.02
Spruce, for sub-floor                0.03
Hardwood for surfacing               0.035
Labor, mixing                        0.03
Labor, laying                        0.015
Carpenter work                       0.025
                                    ------
Total per square foot               $0.195




CHAPTER VII.

METHODS AND COST OF LAYING CONCRETE IN FREEZING WEATHER.


Reinforced concrete work may be done in freezing weather if the end to
be gained warrants the extra cost. Laboratory experiments show beyond
much doubt that Portland cement concrete which does not undergo freezing
temperatures until final set has taken place, or which, if frozen before
it has set, is allowed to complete the setting process after thawing
without a second interruption by freezing, does not suffer loss of
ultimate strength or durability. These requirements for safety may be
satisfied by so treating the materials or compounding the mixture that
freezing will not occur at normal freezing temperature or else will be
delayed until the concrete has set, by so housing in the work and
artificially treating the inclosed space that its temperature never
falls as low as the freezing point, or, by letting the concrete freeze
if it will and then by suitable protection and by artificial heating
produce and maintain a thawing temperature until set has taken place.

~LOWERING THE FREEZING POINT OF THE MIXING WATER.~--Lowering the freezing
point of the mixing water is the simplest and cheapest method by which
concrete can be mixed and deposited in freezing weather. The method
consists simply in adding some substance to the water which will produce
a brine or emulsion that freezes at some temperature below 32° F.
determined by the substance added and the richness of the admixture. A
great variety of substances may be added to water to produce low
freezing brines, but in concrete work only those may be used that do
little or no injury to the strength and durability of the concrete.
Practice has definitely determined only one of these, namely, sodium
chloride or common salt, though some others have been used successfully
in isolated cases. A point to be borne in mind is that cold retards the
setting of cement and that the use of anti-freezing mixtures emphasizes
this phenomenon and its attendant disadvantages in practical
construction. The accompanying diagram, Fig. 39, based on the
experiments of Tetmajer, show the effect on the freezing point of water
by the admixtures of various substances that have been suggested for
reducing the freezing point of mortar and concrete mixtures.

[Illustration: Fig. 39.--Diagram Showing Effect on Freezing Point of
Water by Admixture of Various Substances.]

~Common Salt (Sodium Chloride).~--The substance most usually employed to
lower the freezing point of water used in concrete is common salt.
Laboratory experiments show that the addition of salt retards the
setting and probably lowers the strength of cement at short periods, but
does not, when not used to excess, injure the ultimate strength. The
amount beyond which the addition of salt begins to affect injuriously
the strength of cement is stated variously by various authorities.
Sutcliffe states that it is not safe to go beyond 7 or 8 per cent. by
weight of the water; Sabin places the safe figures at 10 per cent., and
the same figure is given by a number of other American experimenters. A
number of rules have been formulated for varying the percentage of salt
with the temperature of the atmosphere. Prof. Tetmajer's rule as stated
by Prof. J. B. Johnson, is to add 1 per cent. of salt by weight of the
water for each degree Fahrenheit below 32°. A rule quoted by many
writers is "1 lb. of salt to 18 gallons of water for a temperature of
32° F., and an increase of 1 oz. for each degree lower temperature."
This rule gives entirely inadequate amounts to be effective, the
percentage by weight of the water being about 1 per cent. The familiar
rules of enough salt to make a brine that will "float an egg" or "float
a potato" are likewise untrustworthy; they call respectively, according
to actual tests made by Mr. Sanford E. Thompson, for 15 per cent. and 11
per cent. of salt which is too much, according to the authorities quoted
above, to be used safely. In practice an arbitrary quantity of salt per
barrel of cement or per 100 lbs. of water is usually chosen. Preferably
the amount should be stated in terms of its percentage by weight of the
water, since if stated in terms of pounds per barrel of cement the
richness of the brine will vary with the richness of the concrete
mixture, its composition, etc. As examples of the percentages used in
practice, the following works may be quoted: New York Rapid Transit
Railway, 9 per cent. by weight of the water; Foster-Armstrong Piano
Works, 6 per cent. by weight of the water. In summary, it would seem
that if a rule for the use of salt is to be adopted that of Tetmajer,
which is to add 1 per cent. by weight of the water for each degree
Fahrenheit below 32°, is as logical and accurate as any. It should,
however, be accompanied by the proviso that no more than 10 per cent. by
weight of salt should be considered safe practice, and that if the frost
is too keen for this to avail some other method should be adopted or the
work stopped. It may be taken that each unit per cent. of salt added to
water reduces the freezing temperature of the brine about 1.08° F.; a 10
per cent. salt brine will therefore freeze at 32° - 11° = 21° F. The
range of efficiency of salt as a preventative of frost in mixing and
laying concrete is, obviously, quite limited.

~HEATING CONCRETE MATERIALS.~--Heating the sand, stone and mixing water
acts both to hasten the setting and to lengthen the time before the
mixture becomes cold enough to freeze. At temperatures not greatly below
freezing the combined effects are sufficient to ensure the setting of
the concrete before it can freeze. More specific data of efficiency are
difficult to arrive at. There are no test data that show how long it
takes a concrete mixture at a certain temperature to lose its heat and
become cold enough to freeze at any specific temperature of the
surrounding air, and a theoretical calculation of this period is so
beset with difficulties as to be impracticable. Strength tests of
concrete made with heated materials have shown clearly enough that the
heating has no effect worth mentioning on either strength or
durability. Either the water, the sand, the aggregate or all three may
be heated; usually the cement is not heated but it may be if desired.

~Portable Heaters.~--An ordinary half cylinder of sheet steel set on the
ground like an arch is the simplest form of sand heater. A wood fire is
built under the arch and the sand to be heated is heaped on the top and
sides. The efficiency of this device may be improved by closing one end
of the arch and adding a short chimney stack, but even the very crude
arrangement of sheets of corrugated iron bent to an arc will do good
service where the quantities handled are small. This form of heater may
be used for stone or gravel in the same manner as for sand. It is
inexpensive, simple to operate and requires only waste wood for fuel,
but unless it is fired with exceeding care the sand in contact with the
metal will be burned. The drawings of Fig. 40 show the construction of a
portable heater for sand, stone and water used in constructing concrete
culverts on the New York Central & Hudson River Railroad. This device
weighs 1,200 lbs., and costs about $50.

[Illustration: Fig. 40.--Portable Sand, Stone and Water Heater.]

~Heating in Stationary Bins.~--The following arrangement for heating sand
and gravel in large quantities in bins was employed in constructing the
Foster-Armstrong Piano Works at Rochester, N. Y. The daily consumption
of sand and gravel on this work was about 50 cu. yds. and 100 cu. yds.,
respectively. To provide storage for the sand and gravel, a bin 16 ft.
square in projected plan was constructed with vertical sides and a
sloping bottom as illustrated in Fig. 41. This bin was divided by a
vertical partition into a large compartment for gravel and a small
compartment for sand and was provided with two grates of boiler tubes
arranged as shown. These grates caused V-shaped cavities to be formed
beneath in the gravel and sand. Into these cavities penetrated through
one end of the bin 6-in. pipes from a hot air furnace and 1-in. pipes
from a steam boiler. The hot air pipes merely pass through the wall but
the steam pipes continue nearly to the opposite side of the bin and are
provided with open crosses at intervals along their length. In addition
to the conduits described there is a small pipe for steam located below
and near the bottom of the bin. The hot air pipes connected with a small
furnace and air was forced through them by a Sturtevant No. 6 blower.
The steam pipes connected with the boiler of a steam heating system
installed to keep the buildings warm during construction.

[Illustration: Fig. 41.--Bin Arrangement for Heating Sand and Stone.]

~Other Examples of Heating Materials.~--In the construction of the power
plant of the Billings (Mont.) Water Power Co., practically all of the
concrete work above the main floor level was put in during weather so
cold that it was necessary to heat both the gravel and water used. A
sand heater was constructed of four 15-ft. lengths of 15-in. cast iron
pipe, two in series and the two sets placed side by side. This gave a
total length of 30 ft. for heating, making it possible to use the gravel
from alternate ends and rendering the heating process continuous. The
gravel was dumped directly on the heater, thus avoiding the additional
expense of handling it a second time. The heater pipes were laid
somewhat slanting, the fire being built in the lower end. A 10-ft. flue
furnished sufficient draft for all occasions. With this arrangement it
was possible to heat the gravel to a temperature of 80° or 90° F. even
during the coldest weather. Steam for heating the water was available
from the plant. The temperature at which the concrete was placed in the
forms was kept between 65° and 75° F. This was regulated by the man on
the mixer platform by varying the temperature of the water to suit the
conditions of the gravel. When the ingredients were heated in this
manner it was found advisable to mix the concrete "sloppy," using even
more water than would be commonly used in the so-called "sloppy"
concrete. No difficulty was experienced with temperature cracks if the
concrete, when placed, was not above 75° F. All cracks of this nature
which did appear were of no consequence, as they never extended more
than ½ in. below the surface. The concrete was placed in as large masses
as possible. It was covered nights with sacks and canvas and, when the
walls were less than 3 ft. in width, the outside of the forms was lagged
with tar paper. An air space was always left between the surface of the
concrete and the covering. Under these conditions there was sufficient
heat in the mass to prevent its freezing for several days, which was
ample time for permanent setting.

During the construction in 1902 of the Wachusett Dam at Clinton, Mass.,
for the Metropolitan Water Works Commission the following procedures
were followed in laying concrete in freezing weather: After November 15
all masonry was laid in Portland cement, and after November 28 the sand
and water were heated and salt added in the proportion of 4 lbs. per
barrel of cement. The sand was heated in a bin, 16½×15½×10 ft. deep,
provided with about 20 coils of 2-in. pipe, passing around the inside of
the bin. The sand, which was dumped in the top of the bin and drawn from
the bottom, remained there long enough to become warm. The salt for each
batch of mortar was dissolved in the water which was heated by steam;
steam was also used to thaw ice from the stone masonry. The laying of
masonry was not started on mornings when the temperature was lower than
18° F. above zero, and not even with this temperature unless the day was
clear and higher temperature expected. At the close of each day the
masonry built was covered with canvas.

In the construction of dams for Huronian Company's power development in
Canada a large part of the concrete work in dams, and also in power
house foundations, was done in winter, with the temperature varying from
a few degrees of frost to 15 degrees below zero, and on several
occasions much lower. No difficulty was found in securing good concrete
work, the only precaution taken being to heat the mixing water by
turning a ¾-in. steam pipe into the water barrel supplying the mixer,
and, during the process of mixing, to use a jet of live steam in the
mixer, keeping the cylinder closed by wooden coverings during the
process of mixing. No attempt was made to heat sand or stone. In all the
winter work care was taken to use only cement which would attain its
initial set in not more than 65 minutes.

In constructing a concrete arch bridge at Plano, Ill., the sand and
gravel were heated previous to mixing and the mixed concrete after
placing was kept from freezing by playing a steam jet from a hose
connected with the boiler of the mixer on the surface of the concrete
until it was certain that initial set had taken place. Readings taken
with thermometers showed that in no instance did the temperature of the
concrete fall below 32° F. within a period of 10 or 12 hours after
placing.

From experience gained in doing miscellaneous railway work in cold
weather Mr. L. J. Hotchkiss gives the following:

"For thin reinforced walls, it is not safe to rely on heating the water
alone or even the water and sand, but the stone also must be heated and
the concrete when it goes into the forms should be steaming hot. For
mass walls the stone need not be heated except in very cold weather.
Where concrete is mixed in small quantities the water can be heated by a
wood fire, and if a wood fire be kept burning over night on top of the
piles of stone and sand a considerable quantity can be heated. The fire
can be kept going during the day and moved back on the pile as the
heated material is used. This plan requires a quantity of fuel which in
most cases is prohibitive and is not sufficient to supply a power mixer.
For general use steam is far better.

"A convenient method is to build a long wooden box 8 or 10 in. square
with numerous holes bored in its sides. This is laid on the ground,
connected with a steam pipe and covered with sand, stone or gravel. The
steam escaping through the holes in the box will heat over night a pile
of sand, or sand and gravel, 8 or 10 ft. high. Perforated pipes can be
substituted for boxes. Material can be heated more rapidly if the steam
be allowed to escape in the pile than if it is confined in pipes which
are not perforated. Crushed stone requires much more heat than sand or
sand and gravel mixed because of the greater volume of air spaces. In
many cases material which has already been unloaded must be heated. The
expense of putting steam boxes or pipes under it is considerable. To
avoid this one or more steam jets may be used, the end of the jet pipe
being pushed several feet into the pile of material. If the jets are
connected up with steam hose they are easily moved from place to place.
It is difficult to heat stone in this way except in moderate weather.

"On mass work and at such temperatures as are met with in this latitude
(Chicago, Ill.) it is not usually necessary to protect concrete which
has been placed hot except in the top of the form. This can be done by
covering the top of the form with canvas and running a jet of steam
under it. If canvas is not available boards and straw or manure answer
the purpose. If heat is kept on for 36 hours after completion, this is
sufficient, except in unusually cold weather. The above treatment is all
that is required for reinforced retaining walls of ordinary height. But
where box culverts or arches carrying heavy loads must be placed in
service as soon as possible, the only safe way is to keep the main part
of the structure warm until the concrete is thoroughly hardened. Forms
for these structures can be closed at the ends and stoves or salamanders
kept going inside, or steam heat may be used. The outside may be covered
with canvas or boards, and straw and steam jets run underneath. After
the concrete has set enough to permit the removal of the outer forms of
box culverts, fires may be built near the side walls and the concrete
seasoned rapidly. Where structures need not be loaded until after the
arrival of warm weather, heat may be applied for 36 hours, and the
centering left in place until the concrete has hardened. Careful
inspection of winter concrete should be made before loads are applied.
In this connection it may be noted that concrete which has been partly
seasoned and then frozen, closely resembles thoroughly seasoned
concrete. Pieces broken off with a smooth fracture through all the
stones and showing no frost marks, when thawed out, can be broken with
the hands."

In building Portland cement concrete foundations for the West End St.
Ry., Boston, and the Brooklyn Heights R. R., much of the work was done
in winter. A large watertight tank was constructed, of such size that
three skips or boxes of stone could be lowered into it. The tank was
filled with water, and a jet of steam kept the water hot in the coldest
weather. The broken stone was heated through to the temperature of the
water in a few minutes. One of the stone boxes was then hoisted out, and
dumped on one side of the mixing machine, and then run through the
machine with sand, cement and water. The concrete was wheeled to place
without delay and rammed in 12-in. layers. The heat was retained until
the cement was set. In severely cold weather the sand was heated and the
mixing water also. A covering of hay or gunnysacks may be used.

~COVERING AND HOUSING THE WORK.~--Methods of covering concrete to protect
it from light frosts such as may occur over night will suggest
themselves to all; sacking, shavings, straw, etc., may all be used.
Covering wall forms with tar paper nailed to the studding so as to form
with the lagging a cellular covering is an excellent device and will
serve in very cold weather if the sand and stone have been heated. From
these simple precautions the methods used may range to the elaborate
systems of housing described in the following paragraphs.

~Method of Housing in Dam, Chaudiere Falls, Quebec.~--In constructing a
dam for the water power plant at Chaudiere Falls, P. Q., the work was
housed in. The wing dam and its end piers aggregated about 250 ft. in
length by about 20 ft. in width. A house 100 ft. long and 24 ft. wide
was constructed in sections about 10 ft. square connected by cleats with
bolts and nuts. This house was put up over the wing dam. It was 20 ft.
high to the eaves, with a pitched roof, and the ends were closed up; in
the roof on the forebay side were hatchways with sliding doors along the
whole length. Small entrance doors for the workmen were provided in the
ends of the building. The house was heated by a number of cylindrical
sheet-iron stoves about 18 ins. in diameter by 24 ins. high, burning
coke; thermometers placed at different points in the shed gave warning
to stop work when the temperature fell below freezing, which, however,
rarely occurred. Mixing boards were located in the shed, and concrete,
sand and broken stone were supplied in skipfuls by guy derricks located
in the forebay, which passed the material through the hatchways in the
roof, the proper hatchway being opened for the purpose and quickly
closed. The mortar was first mixed on a board, and then a skip-load of
stone was dumped into the middle of the batch and the whole well mixed.
The water was made lukewarm by introducing a steam-jet into several
casks which were kept full. The sand was heated outside in the forebay
on an ordinary sand heater. The broken stone was heated in piles by a
steam-jet; a pipe line on the ground was made up of short lengths of
straight pipe alternating with T-sections--turned up. The stone was
piled 3 to 4 ft. deep over the pipe and a little steam turned into the
pipe. Several such piles kept going all the time supplied enough stone
for the work; the stone was never overheated, and was moist enough not
to dry out the mortar when mixed with it. In this manner the concreting
was successfully carried on and the wing dam built high enough to keep
high water out of the forebay.

Some danger from freezing was also encountered the next season, when the
last part of the wing dam was being constructed. This work was done when
the temperature was close to freezing, and it became necessary to keep
the freshly placed concrete warm over night. This was done by covering
the work loosely with canvas, under which the nozzle of a steam hose was
introduced. By keeping a little steam going all night the concrete was
easily kept above freezing temperature.

[Illustration: Fig. 42.--Canvas Curtain for Enclosing Open Walls.]

[Illustration: Fig. 43.--Sketch Showing Method of Applying Curtains to
Open Walls.]

~Method of Housing in Building Work.~--The following method of housing in
building work is used by Mr. E. L. Ransome. The feature of the system is
that the enclosing structure is made up of a combination of portable
units which can be used over and over again in different jobs. The
construction is best explained in connection with sketches.

Figure 43 shows a first floor wall column with the wall girder
surmounting it and the connecting floor system. It will be seen that the
open sides are enclosed by canvas curtains and the floor slab is covered
with wood shutters. The curtains are composed of separate pieces so
devised that they may be attached to each other by means of snaps and
eyes; one of these curtain units is shown by Fig. 42. Referring now to
Fig. 43, the curtain A is held by the tying-rings to a continuous
string piece B, the upper portion or flap D being held down by a
metal bar or other heavy object so as to lap over the floor covers E.
The lower edge of the curtain is attached to the string piece C. The
sketch has been made to show how the curtain adjusts itself to irregular
projections such as the supports for a wall girder form; to prevent the
curtain tearing on such projections it is well to cover or wrap the
rough edges with burlap, bagging or other convenient material. The
details of the wooden floor covers are shown by Fig. 44; they are
constructed so as to give a hollow space between them and the floor and
holes are left in the floor slab as at H, Fig. 43, to permit the warm
air from below to enter this hollow space. This warm air is provided by
heating the enclosed story of the building by any convenient adequate
means. In constructing factory buildings, 50×200 ft. in plan at
Rochester, N. Y., Mr. Ransome used a line of 3/4 to 3/8-in. steam pipe
located at floor level and running around all four sides and a similar
line running lengthwise of the building at the center, these pipes
discharging live steam through openings into the enclosed space. In
addition to the steam piping 10 braziers in which coke fires were kept
were scattered around the floor. This equipment kept the enclosed story,
50×100 ft.×13 ft. high, at a temperature of 80° F. and at temperature of
about 40° F. between the floor top and its board covering. The work was
not stopped at any time because of cold and the temperatures outside
ranged from zero to 10° above.

[Illustration: Fig. 44.--Portable Wooden Panels for Covering Floors.]




CHAPTER VIII.

METHODS AND COST OF FINISHING CONCRETE SURFACES.


Good design in concrete as well as in steel, masonry and wood, requires
that the structure shall be good to look at. This means that the
proportions must be good and that the surface finish must be pleasing.
Good proportions are a matter of design but a pleasing surface finish is
a matter of construction. Many, perhaps the majority of, concrete
structures do not have a pleasing surface finish; the surface is
irregular, uneven in texture, and stained or discolored or of lifeless
hue. The reasons for these faults and the possible means of remedying
them are matters that concern the construction engineer and the
contractor.

Imperfections in the surface of concrete are due to one or more of the
following causes: (1) Imperfectly made forms; (2) imperfectly mixed
concrete; (3) carelessly placed concrete; (4) use of forms with dirt or
cement adhering to the boards; (5) efflorescence and discoloration of
the surface after the forms are removed.

~IMPERFECTLY MADE FORMS.~--In well mixed and placed concrete the film of
cement paste which flushes to the surface will take the impress of every
flaw in the surface of the forms. It will even show the grain marks in
well dressed lumber. From this it will be seen how very difficult it is
so to mold concrete that the surface will not bear evidence of the mold
used. The task is impracticable of perfect accomplishment and the degree
of perfection to which it can be carried depends upon the workmanship
expended in form construction. Forms with a smooth and even surface are
difficult and expensive to secure. It is impracticable in the first
place to secure lagging boards dressed to exact thickness and in the
second place it is impracticable to secure perfect carpenter work;
joints cannot be got perfectly close and a nail omitted here or there
leaves a board free to warp. From this point on the use of imperfectly
sized lumber and careless carpentry can go to almost any degree of
roughness in the form work. Only approximately smooth and unmarked
concrete surfaces can be secured in plain wooden forms and this only
with the very best kind of form construction. So much for the
limitations of form work in the matter of securing surface finish. These
limitations may be reduced in various ways. Joint marks may be
eliminated wholly or partly by pointing the joints with clay or mortar
or by pasting strips of paper or cloth over them, or the whole surface
of the lagging can be papered; by the use of oiled paper there will be
little trouble from the paper sticking. Grain marks and surface
imperfections can be reduced by oiling the lumber so as to fill the
pores or by first oiling and then filling the coat of oil with fine sand
blown or cast against the boards.

The preceding remarks are of course based on the assumption that as
nearly as possible a smooth and even surface finish is desired. If
something less than this is sufficient, and in many cases it is, form
produced surface defects become negligible in the proportion that they
do not exceed the standards of roughness and irregularity considered
permissible by the engineer and these standards are individual with the
engineer; what one considers excessive roughness and irregularity
another may consider as amply even and smooth. The point to be kept in
mind is that beyond a certain state of evenness and regularity form
produced surfaces are impracticable to obtain, because to construct
forms of the necessary perfection to obtain them costs far more than it
does to employ special supplementary finishing processes.

Surface blemishes due to dirt or cement adhering to the form boards have
no excuse if the engineer or contractor cares to avoid them. It is a
simple matter to keep the lagging clean and free from such
accumulations.

~IMPERFECT MIXING AND PLACING.~--Imperfectly mixed and placed concrete
gives irregularly colored, pitted and honeycombed surfaces with here a
patch of smooth mortar and there a patch of exposed stone. Careful
mixing and placing will avoid this defect, or all chance of it may be
eliminated by using surface coatings of special mixtures. There is no
great difficulty, however, in obtaining a reasonably homogeneous surface
with concrete; the task merely requires that the mixing shall be
reasonably uniform and homogeneous and that in placing this mixture the
spading next to the lagging shall be done in such a way as to pull the
coarse stones back and flush the mortar to the surface. Spading forks
are excellent for this purpose. A better tool is a special spade made
with a perforated blade; this special spade costs $3.

~EFFLORESCENCE.~--Efflorescence is the term applied to the whitish or
yellowish accumulations which often appear on concrete surfaces.
"Whitewash" is another name given to these blotches. Efflorescence is
due to certain salts leaching out of the concrete and accumulating into
thin layers where the water evaporates on the surface. These salts are
most probably sulphates of calcium and magnesium, both of which are
contained in many cements and both of which are slightly soluble in
water. Efflorescence is very erratic in its appearance. Some concretes
never exhibit it; in some it may not appear for several years, and in
others it shows soon after construction and may appear in great
quantities. The most effective way to prevent efflorescence would
naturally be to use cements entirely free from sulphates, chlorides or
whatever other soluble salts are the cause of the phenomenon, but the
likelihood of engineers resorting to the trouble of such selection,
except in rare instances, is not great, even if they knew what cements
to select, so that other means must be sought. The most common place for
efflorescence to appear in walls is at the horizontal junction of two
days' work or where a coping is placed after the main body of the wall
has been completed. The reason of this seems to be that the salt
solutions seep down through the concrete until they strike the nearly
impervious film of cement that forms on the top surface of the old
concrete before the new is added, and then they follow along this
impervious film to the face of the wall. The authors have suggested that
this cause might be remedied by ending the day's work by a layer whose
top has a slight slope down toward the rear of the wall or perhaps by
placing all the concrete in similarly sloping layers. Mr. C. H.
Cartlidge is authority for the statement that this leaching at joints
can be largely done away with by the simple process of washing the top
surface of concrete which has been allowed to set over night by
scrubbing it with wire brushes in conjunction with thorough flushing
with a hose. But efflorescence frequently appears on the faces of walls
built without construction joints and in which a wet concrete is puddled
in and not tamped in layers, and here other means are obviously
essential. Waterproofing the surface of the wall should be effective so
long as the waterproofing lasts; indeed one of the claims made for some
of these waterproofing compounds is that efflorescence is prevented. The
various waterproofing mixtures capable of such use will be found
described in Chapter XXV. Failing in any or all of these methods of
preventing efflorescence the engineer must resort to remedial measures.
The saline coating must be scraped, or chipped, or better, washed away
with acids.

Efflorescence was removed from a concrete bridge at Washington, D. C, by
using hydrochloric (muriatic) acid and common scrubbing brushes; 30
gals. of acid and 36 scrubbing brushes were used to clean 250 sq. yds.
of concrete. The acid was diluted with 4 or 5 parts water to 1 of acid;
water was constantly played with a hose on the concrete while being
cleaned to prevent penetration of the acid. One house-front cleaner and
5 laborers were employed, and the total cost was $150, or 60 cts. per
sq. yd. This high cost was due to the difficulty of cleaning the
balustrades. It is thought that the cost of cleaning the spandrels and
wing walls did not exceed 20 cts. per sq. yd. The cleaning was perfectly
satisfactory. An experiment was made with wire brushes without acid, but
the cost was $2.40 per sq. yd. The flour removed by the wire brushes was
found by analysis to be silicate of lime. Acetic acid was tried in place
of muriatic, but required more scrubbing.

~SPADED AND TROWELED FINISHES.~--With wet-concrete and ordinarily good
form construction a reasonably good surface appearance can be obtained
by spading and troweling. For doing the spading a common gardener's hoe,
straightened out so that the blade is nearly in line with the handle
will do good work. The blade of the tool is pushed down next to the
lagging and the stone pulled back giving the grout opportunity to flush
to the face. Troweling, that is troweling without grout wash, requires,
of course, that the concrete be stripped before it has become too hard
to be worked. As troweling is seldom required except for tops of copings
and corners it is generally practicable to bare the concrete while it is
still fairly green. In this condition the edges of copings, etc., can be
rounded by edging tools such as cement sidewalk workers use.

~PLASTER AND STUCCO FINISH.~--The ordinary concrete surface with a
film-like cement covering will not hold plaster or stucco. To get proper
adhesion the concrete surface must be scrubbed, treated with acid or
tooled before the plaster or stucco is applied and this makes an
expensive finish since either of the preliminary treatments constitutes
a good finish by itself. When a coarse grained facing is made of very
dry mixtures, as described in a succeeding section, it has been made to
hold plaster very well on inside work. In general plaster and stucco
finishes can be classed as uncertain even when the concrete surface has
been prepared to take them, and when the concrete has not been so
prepared such finishes can be classed as absolutely unreliable.

~MORTAR AND CEMENT FACING.~--Where a surface finish of fine texture or of
some special color or composition is desired the concrete is often faced
with a coat of mortar or, sometimes, neat cement paste or grout. Mortar
facing is laid from 1 to 2 ins. thick, usually 1½-ins., the mortar being
a 1-1, 1-2 or 1-3 mixture and of cement and ordinary sand where no
special color or texture is sought. This facing often receives a future
special finish as described in succeeding sections, but it is more
usually used as left by the forms or at best with only a troweling or
brushing with grout. Engineers nearly always require that the mortar
facing and the concrete backing shall be constructed simultaneously.
This is accomplished by using facing forms, two kinds of which are shown
by Figs. 45 and 46. In use the sheet steel plates are placed on edge the
proper distance back of the lagging and the space between them and the
lagging is filled with the facing mortar. The concrete backing is then
filled in to the height of the plate, which is then lifted vertically
and the backing and facing thoroughly bonded by tamping them together.
The form shown by Fig. 46, though somewhat the more expensive, is the
preferable one, since the attached ribs keep the plate its exact
distance from the lagging without any watching by the men, while the
flare at the top facilitates filling. The facing mortar has to be rather
carefully mixed; it must be wet enough to work easily and completely
into the narrow space and yet not be so soft that in tamping the backing
the stones are easily forced through it. Also since the facing cannot
proceed faster than the backing the mortar has to be mixed in small
batches so that it is always fresh. A cubic yard of mortar will make 216
sq. ft. of 1½-in. facing. Cement facing is seldom made more than 1 in.
thick. If placed as a paste the process is essentially the same as for
placing mortar. When grout is used a form is not used; place and tamp
the concrete in 6 to 8-in layers, then shove a common gardener's spade
down between the concrete and the lagging and pull back the concrete
about an inch and pour the opening full of grout and withdraw the spade.
If this work is carefully done there will be very few stones showing
when the forms are removed. When stiff pastes or mortars are used the
contractor often places the facing by plastering the lagging just ahead
of the concreting; this process requires constant watching to see that
the plaster coat does not slough or peel off before it is backed up with
concrete.

[Illustration: Fig. 45.--Form for Applying Cement Facing (Massachusetts
Highway Commission).]

[Illustration: Fig. 46.--Form for Applying Cement Facing (Illinois
Central R. R.).]

~SPECIAL FACING MIXTURES FOR MINIMIZING FORM MARKS.~--The ordinary facing
mixture of mortar or cement is so fine grained and plastic that it
readily takes the impress of every irregularity in the form lagging;
where a particularly good finish is desired this makes necessary
subsequent finishing treatments. To avoid these subsequent treatments
and at the same time to reduce the form marks, special facing mixtures,
which will not take the imprint of and which will minimize rather than
exaggerate every imperfection in the forms, have been used with very
considerable success in the concrete work done for the various Chicago,
Ill., parks. The mixture used consists usually of 1 part cement, 3 parts
fine limestone screenings and 3 parts ¾-in. crushed limestone; these
materials are mixed quite dry so no mortar will flush to the surface
when rammed hard. With moderately good form work the imprint of the
joints is hardly noticeable and grain marks do not show at all. For thin
building walls the special mixture is used throughout the wall, but for
more massive structures it is used only for the facing.

~GROUT WASHES.~--Grout finishes serve only to fill the small pits and
pores in the surface coating; cavities or joint lines, if any exist,
must be removed by plastering or rubbing before the grout is applied or
else by applying the grout by rubbing. In ordinary work the grout is
applied with a brush after the holes have been plastered and the joint
marks rubbed down. The grout to be applied with a brush should be about
the consistency of whitewash; a 1 cement 2 sand mixture is a good one.
Where a more perfect finish of dark color is desired the grout of neat
cement and lampblack in equal parts may be applied as follows: Two coats
with a brush, the second coat after the first has dried, and one coat by
sweeping with a small broom. The broom marks give a slightly rough
surface. Instead of a liquid grout a stiff grout or semi-liquid mortar
applied with a trowel or float can be used. In this case the grout
should be applied in a very thin coat and troweled or floated so that
only the pores are filled and no body of mortar left on the surface or
else it will scale off. A more expensive but very superior grout finish
is obtained by rubbing and scouring the wet grout into the surface with
cement mortar bricks, carborundum bricks, or such like abrasive
materials. A 1 cement 1 sand mortar brick, with a handle molded into it,
and having about the dimensions of an ordinary building brick makes a
good tool for rubbing down joint marks as well as for applying grout.

[Illustration: Fig. 47.--Concrete Baluster Finished by Scrubbing and
Washing.]

~FINISHING BY SCRUBBING AND WASHING.~--A successful finish for concrete
structures consists in removing the forms while the concrete is green
and then scrubbing the surface with a brush and water until the film of
cement is removed and the clean sand or stone left exposed. This method
has been chiefly used in concrete work done by the city of Philadelphia,
Pa., Mr. Henry M. Quimby, Bridge Engineer. Figure 47 shows an example of
scrubbed finish, but of course the texture or color of the surface will
vary with the character of the face mixture and the hue of the sand or
chips used. Warm tones can be secured by the use of crushed brick or red
gravel; a dark colored stone with light sand gives a color much
resembling granite; fine gravel or coarse sand gives a texture like
sandstone. In much of this work done in Philadelphia a mixture composed
of 1 part cement, 2 parts bank sand and 3 parts crushed and cleaned
black, slaty shale from 3/8 to 1/4 in. in size, has been used with good
results both in appearance and in durability. The scrubbing is done
with an ordinary house scrubbing brush at the same time flushing the
concrete with water from a sponge or bucket or, preferably, from a hose.
In general the washing is done on the day following the placing of the
concrete but the proper time depends upon the rapidity with which the
concrete sets. In warm weather 24 hours after placing is generally about
right, but in cold weather 48 hours may be required, and in very cold
weather the concrete has been left to set a week and the scrubbing has
been successful. With the concrete in just the proper condition a few
turns of the brush with plenty of water will clean away the cement, but
if a little too hard wire brushes must be used and if still harder a
scouring brick or an ordinary brick with sand is necessary to cut the
cement film. The process requires that the forms shall be so constructed
that the lagging can be removed when the concrete has reached the proper
age for treatment. Mr. Quimby sets the studs 8 to 12 ins. from the face
and braces the lagging boards against them by cleats nailed so as to be
easily loosened. His practice is to use boards in one width the full
depth of the course and to nail a triangular bead strip to the face at
each edge. These bead strips mark the joints between courses as shown by
Fig. 48. When a "board" is taken off it is cleaned and oiled and reset
for a new course by inserting the bottom bead strip in the half
indentation left by the top bead in the concrete. This is, of course,
for work of such size that one course is a day's work of concreting. In
such work, two carpenters with perhaps one helper will remove a course
of "boards" say 100 ft. long in from 4 to 8 hours. While forms of the
kind described cost more to construct there is a saving by repeated
re-use of the lagging boards. The indentations or beads marking the
courses serve perfectly to conceal the construction joints. The cost of
scrubbing varies with the hardness of the concrete; when in just the
right condition for effective work one man can scrub 100 sq. ft. in an
hour; on the other hand it has taken one man a whole day to scrub and
scour the same area when the concrete was allowed to get hard.

[Illustration: Fig. 48.--Concrete Abutment with Scrubbed Finish and
Course Marks.]

~FINISHING BY ETCHING WITH ACID.~--The acid etched or acid wash process of
finishing concrete consists in first washing the surface with an acid
preparation to remove the surface cement and expose the sand and stone,
then with an alkaline solution to remove all free acid, and finally,
with clear water in sufficient volume to cleanse and flush the surface
thoroughly. The work can be done at any time after the forms are removed
and does not require skilled labor; any man with enough judgment to
determine when the etching has progressed far enough can do the work.
This process has been very extensively used in Chicago by the South Park
Commission, Mr. Linn White, Engineer. In this work the concrete is faced
with a mixture of cement, sand and stone chips, any stone being used
that is not affected by acid. Limestone is excluded. Where some color is
desired the facing can be mixed with mineral pigments or with colored
sand or stone chips. This acid wash process has been patented, the
patentees being represented by Mr. J. K. Irvine, Sioux City, Ia.

~TOOLING CONCRETE SURFACES.~--Concrete surfaces may be bush-hammered or
otherwise tool finished like natural stone, exactly the same methods and
tools being used. Tooling must wait, however, until the concrete has
become fairly hard. As the result of his experience in tooling some
43,000 sq. ft. of concrete, Mr. W. J. Douglas states that the concrete
should be at least 30 days old and, preferably, 60 days old, if
possible, when bush-hammered. There is a great variation in the costs
given for tooling concrete. Mr. C. R. Neher states that a concrete face
can be bush-hammered by an ordinary laborer at the rate of 100 sq. ft.
in 10 hours or at a cost of 1½ cts. per square foot with wages at 15
cts. per hour. Mr. E. L. Ransome states that bush-hammering costs from
1½ to 2½ cts. per square foot, wages of common laborers being 15 cts.
per hour. The walls of the Pacific Borax Co.'s factory at Bayonne, N.
J., were dressed by hand at the rate of 100 to 200 sq. ft. per man per
day; using pneumatic hammer one man was able to dress from 300 to 600
sq. ft. per day. In constructing the Harvard Stadium the walls were
dressed with pneumatic hammers fitted with a tool with a saw-tooth
cutting blade like an ice chopper. Men timed by one of the authors on a
visit to this work were dressing wall surface at the rate of 50 sq. ft.
per hour, but the contractor stated that the average work per man per
day was 200 sq. ft. Common laborers were employed. The average cost of
bush-hammering some 43,000 sq. ft. of plain and ornamental blocks for
the Connecticut Avenue Bridge at Washington, D. C, was 26 cts. per
square foot. Both pneumatic tools and hand tooling were employed and the
work of both is lumped in the above cost, but hand tooling cost about
twice as much as machine tooling. The work was done by high-priced men,
foremen stone cutters at $5 per day and stone cutters at $4 per day.
Moreover a grade of work equal to the best bush-hammered stone work was
demanded. Full details of the cost of this work are given in Chapter
XVII. Mr. H. M. Quimby states that the cost of tooling concrete runs
from 3 cts. to 12 cts. per square foot, according to the character and
extent of the work and the equipment.

~GRAVEL OR PEBBLE SURFACE FINISH.~--An effective variation of the ordinary
stone concrete surface is secured by using an aggregate of rounded
pebbles of nearly uniform size and by scrubbing or etching remove the
cement enough to leave the pebbles about half exposed at the surface. In
constructing a bridge at Washington, D. C, the concrete was a 1-2-5
gravel mixture of 1½ to 2-in. pebbles for the spandrels and arch ring
face and of 1-in. pebbles for the parapet walls. The forms were removed
while the concrete was still green and the cement scrubbed from around
the faces and sides of the pebbles using wire brushes and water. Tests
showed that at 12 hours age the concrete was not hard enough to prevent
the pebbles from being brushed loose and that at 36 hours age it was too
hard to permit the mortar to be scrubbed away without excessive labor;
the best results were obtained when the concrete was about 24 hours old.

~COLORED FACING.~--Where occasion calls for concrete of a color or tint
other than is obtained by the use of the ordinary materials either an
aggregate of a color suitable for the purpose may be used or the mixture
may be colored by the addition of some mineral pigment. The first method
is by all odds the preferable one; it gives a color which will endure
for all time and it in no way injures the strength or durability of the
concrete. Mineral pigments may be secured from any of several well-known
firms who make them for coloring concrete, and they may be had in almost
every shade. Directions for using these colors can be had from the
makers. All but a very few of these mineral colors injure the strength
and durability of the concrete if used in amounts sufficient to produce
the desired color and all of them fade in time. The best method of
producing a colored mortar or concrete facing is to mix the cement with
screenings produced by crushing a natural stone of the desired color.




CHAPTER IX.

METHODS AND COST OF FORM CONSTRUCTION.


Concrete being a plastic material when deposited requires molds or forms
to give it the shape required and to maintain it in that shape until it
has hardened to sufficient strength to require no exterior support. The
material used in constructing forms is wood. Beyond the use of metal
molds for building blocks for sewer construction and for ornamental and
a few architectural shapes, iron and steel are used in form construction
only as ties and clamps to hold parts of wood forms together--except in
rare instances. A discussion of form construction, therefore, is
essentially a discussion of wood forms.

Before taking up this discussion, however, attention deserves to be
called to the opportunities for the development of metal forms. Lumber
is costly and is growing more scarce and costly all the time. A
substitute which can be repeatedly used and whose durability and salvage
value are great presents itself in steel if only a system of form units
can be devised which is reasonably adjustable to varying conditions.
Cylindrical steel column molds have been used to some extent and are
discussed in Chapter XIX. In Chapter XVI we describe a steel form for
side walls of a tunnel lining. In some building work done in the
northwest corrugated steel panels or sheets have been used as lagging
for floor slab centers. A number of styles of metal forms or centers for
sewer and tunnel work have been devised and used and are discussed in
Chapter XXI. Despite this considerable use of metal for special forms
nothing approaching its general use like wood has been attempted, and
the field lies wide open for invention.

The economics of form construction deserve the most serious attention of
the engineer and contractor. It is seldom that form work, outside of
very massive foundation construction, costs less than 50 cts. per cubic
yard of concrete in place, and it is not unusual in the more complex
structures for it to cost $5 per cubic yard of concrete in place. These
costs include the cost of materials and of framing, handling and
removing the forms but they do not embrace extremely high or low costs.
It is evident without further demonstration that time spent in planning
economic form construction for any considerable job of concrete work is
time spent profitably.

In the following sections we review the general considerations which
enter into all form work. Specific details of construction and specific
costs of form work are given in succeeding chapters where each class of
concrete work is discussed separately. This chapter is intended
principally to familiarize the reader with general principles governing
form work.

~EFFECT OF DESIGN ON FORM WORK.~--The designing engineer can generally aid
largely in reducing the cost of form work if he will. This is
particularly true in building work in which, also, form costs run high.
By arranging his beam spacing and sizes with a little care he will
enable the contractor to use his forms over and over and thus greatly
reduce the expense for lumber. In the same way columns may be made of
dimensions which will avoid frequent remaking of column forms. Panel
recesses in walls may be made the thickness of a board or plank, instead
of some odd depth that will require a special thickness of lumber, or
beams may be made of such size that certain dimension widths of lumber
can be used without splitting. In general, carpenter work costs more
than concrete and where a little excess concrete may be contributed to
save carpenter work it pays to contribute it. The figures given in
Chapter XIX, showing the reduction in lumber cost coming from using the
same material over a second or third time, should be studied in this
connection. The leading firms of engineering-contractors which both
design and construct reinforced concrete buildings fully realize these
opportunities and take advantage of them, but the general practitioner,
particularly if he be an architect, does not do so. The authors have
personal knowledge of one building in which a slight change in spacing
and dimensions of beams--a change that would have been of no
architectural or structural significance--would have reduced the
successful contractor's bid for the work by $10,000. The designing
engineer should hold it as a cardinal point in design that form work,
and we will add here reinforcement also, should so far as possible be
made interchangeable from bay to bay and from floor to floor.

~KIND OF LUMBER.~--The local market and the character of the work
generally determine the kind of lumber to be used for forms. The
hardwoods are out of the question for form construction because they
cost too much and are too hard to work. Among the soft woods white pine
costs too much for general use and hemlock is unreliable when exposed to
the weather. This reduces the list generally available to spruce, Norway
pine and the southern pines. Neither green nor kiln-dried lumber is so
good as partially dry stuff, since the kiln-dried lumber swells and
crushes or bulges the joints and green lumber does not swell enough to
close the joints. Forms have to withstand, temporarily, very heavy
loads, therefore, knots, shakes and rot must be watched after. The
choosing of good lumber is a simple process and the contractor who wants
to be able to rely on his forms will look after it carefully, without
going to extremes which the work does not warrant.

~FINISH AND DIMENSIONS OF LUMBER.~--Dressing the lumber serves four
important purposes: It permits the forms to be constructed more nearly
true to line and surface; it permits tighter joint construction; it
gives a smoother surface finish to the concrete, and it facilitates the
removal and cleaning of the forms. Undressed lumber may be used for the
backs of walls and abutments, for work below ground and wherever a
smooth and true surface is unimportant; there are some contractors,
however, who prefer lumber dressed on one side even for these purposes
because of the smaller cost of cleaning. For floor and wall forms the
lumber should always be dressed on one side; where the work is very
particular both sides should be dressed, and in special cases the sides
of the joists or studs against which the lagging lies may be dressed.
For ordinary work a square edge finish does well enough but for fine
face work a tongue and groove or bevel edge finish is preferable. The
tongue and groove finish gives a somewhat tighter joint on first laying
but it does not take up swelling or resist wear so well as the bevel
edge finish.

When ordering new lumber for forms the contractor will save much future
work and waste if he does it from plans. Timber cut to length and width
to go directly into the forms reduces both mill and carpenter work on
the site, and in many cases it can be so ordered if ordered from plans.
Waste is another item that is reduced by ordering from plans; with
lumber costing its present prices crop ends run into money very rapidly.
When old lumber from a previous job is to be used the contractor can
only make the best of his stock, but even here form plans will result in
saving. Sort and pile the old lumber according to sizes and make a
schedule of the quantity of each size on hand; this schedule in the
hands of the man who designs the forms and of the head carpenter will
materially reduce waste and carpenter work. It is often possible
especially in making concrete foundations for frame buildings to use
lumber for forms which is subsequently used for floor beams, etc., in
the building.

Contractors differ greatly in their ideas of the proper thickness of
lumber to use for various parts of form work. Generally speaking 1¼ to
2-in. stuff is used for wall lagging held by studding and 1-in. stuff
when built into panels; for floor lagging 1-in stuff with joists spaced
up to 24 ins. or when built into panels; for column lagging 1¼ to 2-in.
stuff; for sides of girders 1, 1¼, 1½ and 2-in. stuff are all used; and
for bottoms of girders, 1½ and 2-in. stuff. These figures are by no
means invariable as a study of the numerous examples of actual form work
given throughout this book will show.

~COMPUTATION OF FORMS.~--If the minimum amount of lumber consistent with a
given deflection is to be used in form work the sizes and spacing of the
supporting members must be actually computed for the loading. As a
practical matter of fact the amount of material used and the arrangement
of the supports are often subject to requirements of unit construction,
clearance, staging, etc., which supersede the matter of economical
adaptation of material to loading. The designing of form work is at
best, therefore, a compromise between rules of thumb and scientific
calculation. In wall work empirical methods are nearly always followed.
In girder and floor slab work, on the other hand, design is commonly
based on computation.

In the matter of loads the general practice is to assume the weight of
concrete as a liquid at some amount which it is considered will also
cover the weight of men, barrows, runways and current construction
materials. The assumed weights vary. One prominent engineering firm
assumes the load to be the dead weight of concrete as a liquid and the
load due to placing and specifies that the forms shall be designed to
carry this load without deflection. Mr. W. J. Douglas, Engineer of
Bridges, Washington, D. C, assumes for lateral thrust on wall forms that
concrete is a liquid of half its own weight, or 75 lbs. per cu. ft. Mr.
Sanford E. Thompson, Consulting Engineer, Newton Highlands, Mass.,
assumes for dead load, weight of concrete including reinforcement as 154
lbs. per cu. ft., and for live load, 75 lbs. per sq. ft. on slabs and 50
lbs. per sq. ft. in figuring beam and girder forms and struts.

The assumed safe stresses in form work may be taken somewhat higher than
is usual in timber construction, because of the temporary character of
the load. In calculating beams the safe extreme fiber stress may be
assumed at 750 lbs. per sq. in. The safe stress in pounds per square
inch for struts or posts is shown by Table XV, compiled by Mr. Sanford
E. Thompson. The sizes of struts given are those most commonly used in
form work.


TABLE XV.--SAFE STRENGTH OF TIMBER STRUTS FOR FRAME WORK.

                            --Dimensions of Strut.--
Length Strut.      3×4-in.    4×4-in.    6×6-in.    8×8-in.
Feet.               Lbs.       Lbs.       Lbs.       Lbs.

14                 .....         700        900      1,100
12                   600         800      1,000      1,200
10                   700         900      1,100      1,200
 8                   850       1,050      1,200      1,200
 6                 1,000       1,200      1,200      1,200

In using this table it must be borne in mind that bracing both ways
reduces the length of a long strut. For example, if a strut 24 ft. long
be divided into three panels by bracing the length of strut so far as
the table is concerned is 8 ft.

As stated above wall forms are rarely computed. Experience has shown
that the maximum spans of various thicknesses of lagging between
supports are: 1-in. boards, 24 ins.; 1½-in. plank, 4 ft., and 2-in.
plank, 5 ft. Studding will vary in size from 2×4 to 4×6 ins., strutted
and braced horizontally to meet conditions. Column forms, like wall
forms, are rarely computed, yokes being spaced 2 ft. apart for 1¼-in.
lagging up to 3 to 3½ ft. apart for 2-in. lagging.

Floor forms, including girder and slab forms, are computed on the basis
of a maximum deflection and not on the basis of strength. Sagging forms
are liable to rupture the beam or slab. The amount of deflection
considered allowable varies from no deflection up to 3/8 to ½ in.
Assuming the deflection, permissible thickness of the timber necessary
to carry the load is determined by the formulas:

     d = 5 W l³ ÷ 384 E I       (1)

and

         bh³
     I = ---                 (2)
         12

Formula (1) is the familiar one for computing deflection for a beam
supported (not fixed) at the ends. Mr. Sanford F. Thompson suggests
using the constant {3/384}, which is an approximate mean between {1/384}
that for beams with fixed ends and {5/384} that for beams with ends
supported. Formula (1) then becomes

     d = 3 W l³ ÷ 384 E I,

in which as above:

     d = maximum deflection in inches.
     W = total load on plank or joist.
     l = length between supports in inches.
     E = modulus of elasticity of lumber.
     I = moment of inertia of cross-section.
     b = breadth of lumber.
     h = depth of lumber.

The deflection, d, being assumed formula (1) is solved for I, moment
of inertia. Substituting the value of I in formula (2) we can readily
estimate the size of joist or thickness of plank to use.--For spruce,
yellow pine and the other woods commonly used in form work E may be
taken equal to 1,300,000 lbs. per sq. in.

~DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.~--The main points to be kept in mind in the
original design and construction of forms are: Economy in lumber,
economy in carpenter work, and economy in taking down, carrying and
re-erecting. Economy in lumber is not merely the matter of using the
least amount of lumber that will serve the purpose considering the form
as an isolated structure. It may be possible to build a column form, for
example, of very light material which will serve to mold a single
column, but it is evident that we could better afford to use twice this
amount of lumber if by doing so we obtained a form which could be used
over again to mold a second column; no more lumber per column would be
used while the cost of erecting a form already framed is less than the
cost of framing a new form. Economy in lumber in form construction
involves, therefore, recognition of the economies to be gained by
repeated use of the lumber. A certain amount of additional sturdiness is
required in the shape of heavier form lumber and stronger framing to
provide for the wear and tear of repeated use, and it is always economy
to provide it when repeated use is possible. The thing can be overdone,
however; there is an economical limit to repeated use, as we demonstrate
further on. In the matter of economy in carpenter work, a certain amount
of extra work put into framing the forms to withstand the stress of
repeated use is economically justifiable. Also carpenter work put into
framing which substitutes clamps and wedges for nails is sound economy;
generally speaking a skillful form carpenter is recognized by the
scarcity of nails he uses. The possibility of reducing carpenter work by
ordering lumber to length and width from plans has already been
mentioned. It is possible often to go a step further by having certain
standard panels, boxes, etc., made in regular shops. Piece work is often
possible and will frequently reduce framing costs. In designing for
economy in taking down, carrying and re-erecting forms a cardinal point
should be that the work be such that it can be executed by common
laborers. This result can be very nearly approached by careful design,
even for form work that is quite complex, if a special gang is devoted
to the work and trained a little in the various operations. Design the
forms so that they come apart in units by simply removing bolts, clamps
and wedges. They can then be taken down, carried and erected by common
laborers with a skilled man in charge to meet emergencies and to true
and line up the work.

In the matter of details the joints deserve particular attention. In
column and girder forms, generally, joints will be square or butt
joints, and to get them tight the lumber must be dressed true to edge.
Tight joints are considered essential by many not only to avoid joint
marks but for the more important reason that otherwise, with wet
mixtures, a honeycombed concrete is produced by leakage. Where tight
joints are desired tongue and groove stock or stock cut with one edge
beveled and the other square give the best results. The authors believe
that the best general satisfaction will be got from the bevel edge stock
placed so that the bevel edge of one board comes against the square edge
of the next board; undue swelling then results in the bevel edge cutting
into the adjacent square edge without bulging. Tongues and grooves
suffer badly from breakage. As a matter of fact square edged stock, if
well dressed and sized and well filled with moisture, can be used and is
used with entire success in nearly all kinds of work. The leakage will
be very slight with ordinarily good butt joints and so far as surface
appearance goes joint marks are more cheaply and more satisfactorily
eliminated by other means than attempting to get cabinet work in form
construction. Where girder forms join columns or beams connect with
girders and at the angles of floor slabs with beams the edges or corners
of the forms should be rounded. The edges of beams and column corners
will appear better if beveled; a triangular strip in the corners of the
forms will provide this bevel. Forms and mold construction for
ornamental work call for and are given special consideration in Chapter
XXIII. In conclusion, the reader should study the specific examples of
form construction for different purposes that are given throughout the
book for hints as to special practice and details.

~UNIT CONSTRUCTION OF FORMS.~--Unit construction has a somewhat variable
meaning in form work. In wall and tank work and in some other kinds of
work unit construction means the use of form units which are gradually
moved ahead or upward as the concreting progresses or of form units
which are used one after another in continuous succession as the
concreting progresses. In column, girder and floor work unit
construction means the division of the form work as a whole and also of
the individual forms into independent structural units; thus in forms
for a building the column forms may be independent of the girder forms
and also each column and girder form be made up of several separate
units. In all cases unit construction has for its purpose the use of the
same form or at least the same form lumber over and over for molding
purposes. Every time the use of the same form is repeated, the cost of
form work per cubic yard of concrete placed is reduced. The theoretical
limit of economical repetition is then the limit of endurance of the
form, the practical limit, however, is something quite different. Most
concrete work varies in form or dimensions often enough to prevent the
use of the same forms more than a few times, and even if these
variations did not exist the time element would enter to prevent the
same form or form lumber being used more than a certain number of times.
Unit construction to give repeated use of forming has, therefore, its
economic limits. The significance of this conclusion does not lie in any
novelty that it possesses but in the fact that for any piece of work it
determines the labor that may profitably be expended in working out and
constructing form units.

~LUBRICATION OF FORMS.~--All forms for concrete require a coating of some
lubricant to prevent the concrete from adhering to the wood with which
it comes in contact. Incidentally this coating tends to give a smoother
surface to the concrete and to preserve the wood against damage by its
alternate wetting and drying. The great value of lubrication is,
however, that it reduces the cost of removing forms. The requisite of a
good coating material is that it shall be thin enough to spread evenly
and to fill the pores and grain of the wood. Crude oil or petroline
makes one of the best coatings, but various other greasy substances will
serve. Where the forms are not to be removed until the concrete has set
hard a thorough wetting of the wood just before the concrete is placed
is all the coating necessary. Any concrete adhering to forms should be
thoroughly cleaned off before they are used again and the wood
underneath given a special heavy coating.

~FALSEWORKS AND BRACING.~--The falseworks which support the forms proper
and stagings for workmen, runways, material hoists, etc., do not call
for any striking differences in construction and arrangement from such
work elsewhere. For wall forms inclined props reaching from ground to
studding are used for walls of moderate height such as retaining walls,
wing walls, and abutments. For building walls of some height a gallows
frame arrangement or the common braced staging used by masons and
carpenters is used. In building construction, however, movable forms are
commonly employed for walls more than one story high and should always
be employed above one story to save staging timber. Column forms are
seldom braced unless erected without connecting girder or floor forms at
their tops, and then only by diagonal props to the floor or ground.
Girder and floor supports usually consist of uprights set under the
girder form at intervals and occasionally under floor slab forms. The
spacing of props and uprights will be regulated by the judgment of the
foreman and boss carpenter; no general rule is applicable, except that
enough lumber must be used to hold the forms rigid and true to line and
level. The various illustrations of actual formwork which follow are the
best guides to good practice.

~TIME FOR AND METHOD OF REMOVING FORMS.~--No exact time schedule for
removing forms is wise in concrete work. Concrete which is mixed wet
sets slower than dry concrete and concrete sets slower in cold weather
than it does in warm weather. Again the time of removal is influenced by
the risk taken by too early removal, and also by the nature of the
stresses in the member to be relieved of support. In all cases the forms
should be removed as soon as possible so that they can be used over
again and so that the concrete may be exposed to the air to hasten
hardening. The following suggestions as to time of removal are general
and must be followed with judgment.

Using dry concrete in warm weather the forms for retaining walls,
pedestals, isolated pillars, etc., can be removed in 12 hours; using wet
or sloppy concrete the time will be increased to 24 hours. In cold
weather the setting is further delayed and inspection is the only safe
guide to follow. Very cold weather delays setting indefinitely. Forms
for small arch work like sewers and culverts may be removed in 18 to 24
hours if dry concrete is used, and in 24 to 48 hours if wet concrete is
used. The time for removing large arch centers should not be less than
14 days for spans up to 50 ft. if the arch is back-filled at once; when
the center is not to be used again it is better to let it stand 28 days.
For very large arches the problem becomes a special one and is
considered in Chapter XVII. In building construction the following
schedule is a common one. Remove the column forms in 7 days and the
sides of the girder forms and the floor lagging in 14 days leaving the
bottom boards of the girder forms and their supports in place for 21
days.

As an example of individual practice the following requirements of a
large firm of concrete contractors are given:

Walls in mass work, 1 to 3 days, or until the concrete will bear
pressure of the thumb without indentation.

Thin walls, in summer, 2 days; in cold weather, 5 days.

Slabs up to 6-ft. span, in summer, 6 days; in cold weather, 2 weeks.

Beams and girders and long span slabs, in summer, 10 days or 2 weeks; in
cold weather, 3 weeks to 1 month. If shores are left without disturbing
them, the time of removal of the sheeting in summer may be reduced to 1
week.

Column forms, in summer, 2 days; in cold weather, 4 days, provided
girders are shored to prevent appreciable weight reaching columns.

Conduits, 2 or 3 days, provided there is not a heavy fill upon them.

Arches, of small size, 1 week; for large arches with heavy dead load, 1
month.

The method of removing forms will vary in detail with the character of
the structure. With proper design and lubrication of forms they will
ordinarily come away from the concrete with a moderate amount of sledge
and bar work. If the work will warrant it, have a special gang under a
competent foreman for removing forms. The organization of this gang and
the procedure it should follow will vary with the nature of the form
work, and they are considered in succeeding chapters for each kind of
work.

~ESTIMATING AND COST OF FORM WORK.~--It is common practice to record the
cost of forms in cents per cubic yard of concrete, giving separately the
cost of lumber and labor. This should be done, but the process of
analysis should be carried further. The records should be so kept as to
show the first cost per 1,000 ft. B. M. of lumber, the number of times
the lumber is used, the labor cost of framing, the labor cost of
erecting and the labor cost of taking down, all expressed in M. ft. B.
M. In this way only is it possible to compare the cost of forms on
different kinds of concrete work, and thus only can accurate predictions
be made of the cost of forms for concrete work having dimensions
differing from work previously done. It is well, also, to make a note of
the number of square feet of exposed concrete surface to which the forms
are applied.

Some of the items mentioned demand brief explanation. Framing and
erecting costs are kept separate for the reason that the framing is done
only once, whereas the erecting occurs two or more times. The lumber
cost, where the material is used more than once, can be computed in two
ways. An example will illustrate the two modes of procedure. In one of
the buildings described in Chapter XIX the lumber cost $30 per M. ft. B.
M. and was used three times. As 34,000 ft. B. M. were required to encase
the 200 cu. yds. of concrete in one floor, including columns, it would
have required 34,000 ÷ 200 = 170 ft. B. M. of lumber at $30 per M. per
cubic yard of concrete if it had been used only once. But since it was
used three times we may call it 170 ft. B. M. at $10 per M. per cubic
yard of concrete, or we may call it 170 ÷ 3 = 57 ft. B. M. at $30 per M.
per cubic yard of concrete. The authors prefer the first method, due to
the fact that it is 170 ft. B. M. that is handled and taken down each
time and it is more consistent to have the lumber cost on the same basis
thus:

170 ft. B. M. of lumber at $10 per M         $1.70
170 ft. B. M. handled at $2 per M             0.34
170 ft. B. M. erected at $7 per M             1.19
                                             -----
    Total 170 ft. B. M. per cu. yd           $3.23

Returning to our main thought, there are three ways of recording the
cost of form work: (1) In cents per cubic yard of concrete; (2) in cents
per square foot of concrete face to which forms are applied, and (3) in
dollars per 1,000 ft. B. M. of lumber used. In all cases the cost of
materials and of labor should be kept separate. It is well if it can be
done to attach a sketch of the forms to the record. So much for the
general method of recording costs in form work.

In estimating the probable cost of forms for any job the following
method will be found reliable: Having the total cubic yards of concrete
in the work and the time limit within which the work must be completed
determine the number of cubic yards that must be placed per day, making
liberal allowances for delays. Next estimate the number of thousands of
feet board measure of forms required to encase the concrete to be placed
in a day. This will give the minimum amount of lumber required, for it
is seldom permissible to remove the forms until the concrete has
hardened over night. Now we come to the very important and puzzling
question of the time element, particularly in work where it is possible
to use the same forms or the same form lumber two or more times.

It has already been pointed out that wet concrete sets more slowly than
dry concrete; that all concrete sets more slowly in cold than in warm
weather, and that the support of forms is necessary a longer time for
pieces subject to bending stress like arches and girders. General
suggestions as to specific times for removing forms have also been
given. Where the specifications state the time of removal the contractor
has a definite guide, but where they do not, as is most often the case,
he must depend very largely on judgment and previous experience. Another
matter which deserves consideration is the use of the forms as staging
for runways or tracks. Such use may result in forms having to stand on
work for sake of their service as trestles much longer than there is any
necessity so far as supporting the concrete is concerned. A derrick or
cableway may often prove cheaper than tieing up form lumber by trying to
make it serve the double purpose of a trestle.

The possibilities of repeated use of forms and of unit construction of
forms have already been noted. This is the next point to be considered
in estimating form lumber. At the expense of a little planning movable
forms can be used to materially reduce the amount of lumber required.
The reader is referred particularly to the chapters on retaining wall,
conduit and building work for specific data on movable form work.

Having estimated the amount of lumber required and the number of times
it can be used the labor cost of framing, erecting and taking down can
be figured. In ordinary retaining wall work forms will cost for framing
and erection from $6 to $7 per M. ft. B. M. To tear down such forms
carefully and to carry the lumber a short distance will cost some $1.50
to $2 per M. ft. B. M. We have then a cost of $7.50 to $9 per M. ft. B.
M. for each time the forms are erected and torn down. Where movable
panels are used and the forms not ripped apart and put together again
each time there is of course only the cost of moving, which may run as
low as 50 cts. per M. ft. B. M. Framing and erecting centers for piers
will run about the same as for retaining wall. At this point it may be
noted that in estimating the cost of forms for plain rectangular piers
the following method will give very accurate results. Ascertain the
surface area of the four sides of the pier. Multiply this area by 2, and
the product will be the number of feet board measure of 2-in. plank
required. Add 40 per cent. to this, and the total will be the number of
feet board measure of 2-in. plank and of upright studs (4×6), spaced 2½
ft. centers. Sometimes 3×6-in. studs are used, and spaced 2 ft. centers,
which requires practically the same percentage (40 per cent.) of timber
for the studs as where 4×6-in. studs are used and spaced 2½ ft. centers.
No allowance is made for timber to brace the studs, since, in pier work,
it is customary to hold the forms together either with bolts or with
ordinary No. 9 telegraph wire, which weighs 0.06 lb. per foot. The
foregoing data can be condensed into a rule that is easily remembered:

_Multiply the number of square feet surface area of the sides and ends
of a concrete pier by 2.8, and the product will be the number of feet
board measure required for sheet plank and studs for the forms._

If the form lumber can be used more than once, divide the number of feet
board measure by the number of times that it can be used, to ascertain
the amount to be charged to each pier. Forms can be erected and taken
down for $8 per M. carpenters being paid $2.50 and laborers $1.50 a day.
Since there are 2.8 ft. B. M. of forms per square foot of surface area
of concrete to be sheeted, it costs 2¼ cts. for the labor of carpenters
per square foot of surface area to be sheeted. If lumber is worth $24
per M., and is used three times, then the lumber itself also costs 2¼
cts. per sq. ft. of surface area of concrete. By dividing the total
number of cubic yards of concrete into the total number of square feet
of area of surface to be sheeted with forms, the area per cubic yard is
obtained. Multiply this area by 4½ cts., and the product is the cost per
cubic yard for material in the forms (assumed to be used three times)
and the labor of erecting it and taking it down.

The cost of framing and erection of forms for building work and of
centers for large arches is a special problem in each case and is
considered in the chapters devoted to those classes of work.




CHAPTER X.

METHODS AND COST OF CONCRETE PILE AND PIER CONSTRUCTION FOR FOUNDATIONS.


Two general methods of concrete pile construction are available for
engineering work. By one method a hole is formed in the ground by
driving a steel shell or by other special means and this hole is filled
with concrete. By the other method the pile is molded in suitable forms
and after becoming hard is driven as a wood or steel pile is driven.
Piles constructed by the first method may be either plain or reinforced,
but piles constructed by the second method are always reinforced to
strengthen them for handling and driving. Concrete piers for foundation
work are simply piles of enlarged diameter.

~MOLDING PILES IN PLACE.~--Molding piles in place requires the use of
special apparatus, and this apparatus is to a very large degree
controlled by patents. Pile work of this kind is thus generally done by
concerns which control the use of the apparatus employed and the general
contractor can undertake it only by permission of the proprietary
companies. The methods of work followed and the cost of work are thus of
direct interest only as general information.

~Method and Cost of Constructing Raymond Piles.~--The machinery and
processes employed in the construction of Raymond concrete piles are
patented and all piling work by this method is controlled by the Raymond
Concrete Pile Co. As detail costs of construction are not given out by
the company the following figures collected by the authors are subject
to revision. They are believed to be fairly approximate, having in one
case been obtained by personal watch on the work and in the other case
from authentic records of the engineers on the work.

The pile is made as follows: A collapsible steel core 30 ft. long, 20
ins. diameter at the top and 6 ins. diameter at the bottom, encased in
a thin sheet steel shell, is driven into the ground by an ordinary pile
driver. When it has reached the proper depth, a wedge is loosened,
permitting the two sections of the core to come closer together so that
the core can be pulled out of the hole, leaving the steel shell behind
as a casing to prevent the sides from caving in. The shell is made of
No. 20 gage steel, usually in four or more sections, which telescope one
over the other. A nest of sections is slipped over the lower end of the
core as it hangs in the leads, a rope is hitched around the outer
section and the engine hoists away until the sections are
"un-telescoped" and drawn snug onto the core. The rope is then
unfastened and the driving begins. Figure 49 shows the usual pile
driving rig used. The following are examples of pile construction in
actual work:

_Example I._--In this work, for a building foundation in New York City,
the pile driver was mounted on a turntable, the framework of the
turntable in turn resting on rollers traveling on timbers laid on the
ground. The driver was moved along and rotated when necessary by ropes
passing around the winch head of the engine. The driver had 50-ft. leads
and a 3,100-lb. hammer operated by an ordinary friction clutch hoisting
engine. The hammer blow was received by an oak block fitting into a
recess at the top of the steel core. This block was so battered by the
blows that it had to be renewed about every five or six piles driven. A
¾-in. wire rope passing over a 10-in. sheave lasted for the driving of
130 piles and then broke. When the work was first begun the crew
averaged 10 piles per 10-hour day, but the average for the job was 13
piles per day, and the best day's work was 17 piles. The cost of labor
and fuel per pile was as follows:

5 men on driver at $1.75                   $ 8.75
2 men handling shells at $1.75               3.50
1 engineman                                  3.00
6 men mixing and placing concrete           10.50
1 foreman                                    5.00
Coal and oil                                 2.50
                                          -------
     Total, 13 piles, at $2.55             $33.25

[Illustration: Fig. 49.--Pile Driver Rigged for Constructing Raymond
Concrete Piles.]

Deducting the cost of placing the concrete we get a cost of $1.75 for
driving the cores. The pile, 25 ft. long, 6 ins. at the point and 18
ins. at the head, contains 21¼ cu. ft., or 0.8 cu. yd., of concrete, and
has a surface area of 77 ft. As No. 20 steel weighs 1.3 lbs. per sq.
ft., each shell weighed approximately 100 lbs. The cost per pile may
then be summarized as follows:

1.2 bbls. cement in 0.8 cu. yd., at $1.75        $2.10
0.8 cu. yd. stone at $1.25                        1.00
1/3 cu. yd. sand at $1.05                         0.35
100 lbs. steel in shell at 3½ cts.                3.50
Labor and fuel as above                           2.55
                                                 -----
    Total per pile (38 cts. per lin. ft.)        $9.50

_This cost, it should be carefully noted, does not include cost of
moving plant to and from work or general expenses._

_Example II._--In constructing a building at Salem, Mass., 172
foundation piles, 14 to 37 ft. long, 6 ins. diameter at the point and 20
ins. diameter at the top, were constructed by the Raymond process. The
general contractor made the necessary excavations and provided clear and
level space for the pile driver, braced all trenches and pier holes, set
stakes for the piles and gave all lines and levels. The piles were
driven by a No. 2 Vulcan steam hammer with a 3,000-lb. plunger having a
drop of 3 ft., delivering 60 blows per minute. Figure 49 shows the
driver at work. Sixteen working days were occupied in driving the piles
after the driver was in position. The greatest number driven in one day
was 20, and the average was 11 piles per day. When in position for
driving, the average time required to complete driving was 12 minutes.
The total number of blows varied from about 310 to 360, the average
being about 350. The piles were driven until the penetration produced by
8 to 10 blows equaled 1 in. When in full operation, a crew of 5 men
operated the pile driver. Seven men were engaged in making the concrete
and 5 men working upon the metal shells.

Assuming the ordinary organization and the wages given below, we have
the following labor cost per day:

1 foreman at $5                           $ 5.00
1 engineman at $3                           3.00
4 laborers on driver at $1.75               7.00
6 laborers making concrete at $1.75        10.50
5 laborers handling shells at $1.75         8.75
                                          ------
    Total                                 $34.25

As 172 piles averaging 20 ft. in length were driven in 16 days, the
total labor cost of driving, given by the figures above, is 16 × $34.25
= $548, or practically 16 cts. per lineal foot of pile driven.

The concrete used in the piles was a 1-3-5 Portland cement, sand and
1½-in. broken stone mixture. A 20-ft. pile of the section described
above contains about 20 cu. ft. of concrete, or say 0.75 cu. yd. We can
then figure the cost of concrete materials per pile as follows:

0.85 bbl. cement at $1.60                 $1.36
0.36 cu. yd. sand at $1                    0.36
0.60 cu. yd. stone at $1.25                0.75
                                          -----
     Total per pile                       $2.47

The steel shell has an area of about 72 sq. ft., and as No. 20 gage
steel weighs 1.3 lbs. per sq. ft., its weight for each pile was about 94
lbs. Assuming the cost of coal, oil, etc., at $2.50 per day, we have the
following summary of costs:

                                        Per lin. ft.
                                            of pile.
Labor driving and concreting                   $0.16
Concrete materials                             0.123
94 lbs. steel shell at 3 cts.                  0.145
Coal, oil, etc.                                0.011
                                              ------
    Total                                     $0.439

_The cost does not include interest on plant, cost of moving plant to
and from work and general expenses._

[Illustration: Fig. 50.--Sketch Showing Method of Constructing Simplex
Concrete Piles.]

~Method of Constructing Simplex Piles.~--The apparatus employed in driving
Simplex piles resembles closely the ordinary wooden pile driven, but it
is much heavier and is equipped to pull as well as to drive. A 3,300-lb.
hammer is used and it strikes on a hickory block set in a steel drive
head which rests on the driving form or shell. This form consists of a
¾-in. steel shell 16 ins. in diameter made in a single 40-ft. length.
Around the top of the shell a ½-in. thick collar or band 18 ins. deep is
riveted by 24 1-in. countersunk rivets. This band serves the double
purpose of preventing the shell being upset by the blows of the hammer
and of giving a grip for fastening the pulling tackle. The bottom of the
form or shell is provided with a point. Two styles of point are
employed. One style consists of two segments of a cylinder of the same
size as the form, so cut that they close together to form a sort of clam
shell point. In driving, the two jaws are held closed by the pressure of
the earth and in pulling they open apart of their own weight to permit
the concrete to pass them. This point, known as the alligator point, is
pulled with the shell. It is suitable only for driving in firm, compact
soil, in loose soil the pressure inward of the walls keeps the jaws
partly closed and so contracts the diameter of the finished pile. The
second style of point is a hollow cast iron point, 10 ins. deep and 16½
ins. in diameter, having a neck over which the driving form slips and an
annular shoulder outside the neck to receive the circular edge of the
shell. The projected sectional area of this point is 1.4 sq. ft. It is
left in the ground when the form is withdrawn. The form is withdrawn by
means of two 1-in. cables fastened to a steel collar which engages under
the band at the top of the form. The cables pass in the channel leads on
each side over the head of the driver and down in back to a pair of
fivefold steel blocks, the lead line from which passes to one of the
drums of the engine. In this manner the power of the drum is increased
ten times and it is not unusual to break the pulling cables when the
forms are in hard ground. The general method of construction is about as
shown by Fig. 50, being changed slightly to meet varying conditions. The
form resting on a cast iron point is driven to hard ground. A heavy
weight is then lowered into the form to make sure the point is loose.
While the weight is at the bottom of the form a target is placed on its
line at the top of the form, the purpose of which will be apparent
later. The weight is then withdrawn. Given the length of the pile and
sectional area, it is an easy matter to determine the volume of concrete
necessary to fill the hole.

This amount is put into the form by means of a specially designed bottom
dump bucket, which permits the concrete to leave it in one mass,
reaching its destination with practically no disintegration. It will be
noticed that when the full amount of concrete is in the form its surface
is considerably above the surface of the ground. This is due to the fact
that the thickness of the form occupies considerable space that is to be
occupied by the concrete. The weight is now placed on top of the
concrete and the form is pulled. The target previously mentioned now
becomes useful. As the form is withdrawn the concrete settles down to
occupy the space left by the walls of the form. Obviously this
settlement should proceed at a uniform rate, and as it is difficult to
watch the weight, the target on its line further up is of considerable
help. By watching this target in connection with a scale on the leads of
the driver, it can be readily told how the concrete in the form is
acting. As another check, the target, just as the bottom of the form is
leaving the ground should be level with the top of the form. This would
indicate that the necessary amount of concrete has gone into the ground
and that, other conditions being all right, the pile is a good one. In
some grounds where the head of concrete in the form exerts a greater
pressure than the back pressure or resistance of the earth, the concrete
will be forced out into the sides of the hole, making the pile of
increased diameter at that point and necessitating the use of more
concrete to bring the pile up to the required level.

~Method of Constructing Piles with Enlarged Footings.~--A pile with an
enlarged base or footing has been used in several places by Mr. Charles
R. Gow of Boston, Mass., who has patented the construction. A single
pipe or a succession of pipes connected as the work proceeds is driven
by hammer to the depths required. The material inside the shell is then
washed out by a water jet to the bottom of the shell and then for a
further distance below the shell bottom. An expanding cutter is then
lowered to the bottom of the hole and rotated horizontally so as to
excavate a conical chamber, the water jet washing the earth out as fast
as it is cut away. When the chamber has been excavated the water is
pumped out and the chamber and shell are filled with concrete. The
drawings of Fig. 51 show the method of construction clearly. The
chambering machine is used only in clay or other soil which does not
wash readily. In soil which is readily washed the chamber can be formed
by the jet alone. The practicability of this method of construction is
stated by Mr. Gow to be limited to pipe sizes up to about 14 ins. in
diameter.

[Illustration: Fig. 51.--Sketch Showing Method of Constructing Concrete
Piles with Enlarged Footings.]

~Method of Constructing Piles by the "Compressol" System.~--The compressol
system of concrete pile or pillar construction is a French invention
that has been widely used abroad and which is controlled in this country
by the Hennebique Construction Co., of New York, N. Y. The piles are
constructed by first ramming a hole in the ground by repeatedly
dropping a conical "perforator" weighing some two tons. This perforator
is raised and dropped by a machine resembling an ordinary pile driver.
The conical weight gradually sinks the hole deeper and deeper by
compacting the earth laterally; this lateral compression is depended
upon so to consolidate the walls of the hole that they do not cave
before the concrete can be placed. The concrete is deposited loose in
the hole and rammed solid by dropping a pear-shaped weight onto it as it
is placed. The view Fig. 52 shows the "perforator" and the tamping
apparatus at work. Very successful work has been done abroad by this
method.

[Illustration: Fig. 52.--View of Apparatus Used in Constructing
Compressol Piles.]

~Method of Constructing Piers in Caissons.~--For piles or pillars of
diameters larger than say 18 ins. the use of driving shells and cores
becomes increasingly impracticable. Concrete pillars of large size are
then used. They are constructed by excavating and curbing a well or
shaft and filling it with concrete. This construction has been most used
in Chicago, Ill., for the foundations for heavy buildings, but it is of
general application where the sub-soil conditions are suitable. The
method is not patented or controlled by patents in any particular,
except that certain tools and devices which may be used are proprietary.

_General Description._--The caisson method of construction is simple in
principle. A well is dug by successive excavations of about 5 ft. each.
After each excavation of 5 ft. is completed, wood lagging is placed
around the sides and supported by internal steel rings, so that the soft
ground around the excavation is maintained in its former position. The
methods of excavating and removing the soil and of constructing the
lagging are considered in detail further on. The caissons vary in
diameter according to the load; some as large as 12 ft. in diameter have
been sunk, but the usual diameter is 6 ft.; a caisson of 3 ft. in
diameter is as small as a man can get into and work. When the pier goes
to bed rock the caisson is made of uniform diameter from top to bottom,
but where the pier rests on hardpan the bottom portion of the well is
belled out to give greater bearing area. It is customary to load the
piers about 20 tons per square foot.

[Illustration: Fig. 53.--Curbing for Concrete Piers (Usual
Construction).]

_Caisson Construction._--The caisson construction, or more correctly the
form of curbing most commonly used, is that indicated by the sketch,
Fig. 53. The lagging is 2×6 in. or 3×6 in., stuff 5 ft. 4 ins. or 4 ft.
long set vertically around the well and held in place by interior
wrought iron rings. For a 6-ft. diameter caisson these hoops are ¾ by 3
ins.; they are made in two parts, which are bolted together as shown by
Fig. 53. Generally there are two rings for each length of lagging; for
5-ft. lagging they are placed about 9 ins. from each end. In some
cases, however, engineers have specified three rings for the upper
sections in soft clay and two rings for the sections in the hard ground
lower down. The lagging used is not cut with radial edges, but is rough,
square cut stuff; the rings, therefore, take the inward pressure
altogether.

[Illustration: Fig. 54.--Curbing for Concrete Piers (Jackson Patent).]

In some recent work done by the inventor use has been made of the
caisson construction shown by Fig. 54 and patented by Mr. Geo. W.
Jackson. In place of the plain rings a combination of T-beam ribs and
jacks is used; this construction is clearly shown by the drawing. The
advantages claimed for the construction are that it gives absolute
security to the workmen and the work, that the lagging can be jacked
tightly against the outer walls of the well, that the braces form a
ladder by which the workmen can enter and leave the well, and that the
possibility of shifting the bracing easily permits the concrete to be
placed to the best advantage. On the other hand the braces abstruct the
clear working space of the caissons.

[Illustration: Fig. 55.--Layout of Plant for Concrete Pier Construction.
Cook County Court House Foundations.]

_Excavating and Handling Material._--The excavation of the wells is done
by hand, using shovels and picks, and, in the hardpan, special grubs
made by A. J. Pement and George Racky, Chicago blacksmiths. The
excavated material is hoisted out of the well in buckets made by the
Variety Iron Works, of Chicago. For caissons which are not specified to
go to rock it is considered more economical to do the hoisting by
windlass derricks operated by hand. These derricks have four 6×6-in.
legs and a 3×6-in. top piece. When the caissons go to rock the hoisting
is done by power, so-called "cable set-ups" being used in most cases. To
illustrate this method the following account of the foundation work for
the Cook County Court House is given:

The Cook County Court House foundations consist of 126 caissons varying
from 4 ft. to 10½ ft. in diameter and averaging$ 7½ ft. in diameter.
They were sunk to rock at a depth of 115 ft. below street level. The
work involved 22,000 cu. yds. of excavation and the placing in the
caissons of 17,000 cu. yds. of concrete. Over 1,000 piles about 40 ft.
long, that had formed the foundation of the old Court House built in
1875, were removed. These piles were found to be in good condition. The
work was done by the George A. Fuller Co., of Chicago, Ill.,
Contractors, with Mr. Edgar S. Belden Superintendent in Charge. The
details which follow have been obtained from Mr. Belden.

[Illustration: Fig. 56.--Section Showing Arrangement of Hoist for
Concrete Pier Construction.]

The foundation area was 157×375 ft., and was excavated to a depth of 15
ft. below the street surface before the caissons were started. The
caissons, of which there were 126, were arranged in rows across the lot,
there being from six to eight caissons in a row. The arrangement of the
plant for the work is indicated by Fig. 55. One row of caissons formed a
unit. A platform or "stand" was erected over each caisson and carried in
its top a tripod fitted with a "nigger head" operated by a rope sheave.
This arrangement is shown by Fig. 56. An engine on the bank operated by
a rope drive all the tripod sheaves for a row of six or eight caissons.
The arrangement is indicated by Fig. 55. The clay hoisted from the pits
was dumped into 1 cu. yd. hoppers with which the stands were fitted, as
shown by Fig. 56; when a hopper was full it was dumped into a car
running on a 24-in. gage portable track. Side dump Koppel cars of 1 cu.
yd. capacity were used; they dumped their load into an opening connected
with the tracks of the Illinois Tunnel Co., where the material passed
into tunnel cars and was taken to the lake front about one mile away. As
soon as one row of caissons was completed the stands, tripods, etc.,
which were made portable, were shifted to another row. At times as many
as five units were in operation, sinking 40 caissons.

[Illustration: Fig. 57.--Details of Working Platform for Concrete Pier
Construction.

Side Elevation.

End Elevation.

Bottom Plan.

Section.]

Fig. 56 shows the arrangement in detail at one caisson. In this work the
lagging used was 3×6-in. maple, 5 ft. 4 ins. long, and was supported by
3×¾-in. steel hoops. The lagging was matched and dressed. The "nigger
head," as will be seen, is operated by a rope sheave on the same axle.
As stated above, an endless rope drive operated all the "nigger heads"
on a row of caissons. A 26-in. driving sheave was attached to an
ordinary hoisting engine equipped with a governor. The driving rope was
5/8-in. steel. It was wrapped twice around the driving sheave and once
around the "nigger head" sheaves. These latter were 18 ins. in diameter.
For the hoists 1-in. Manila rope was used. The other details, the
bucket, bucket hook, swivel block, etc., are made clear by the drawing.
The platforms, tripods, etc., were of the standard dimensions and
construction adopted by the contractors of the work. Detail drawings of
the standard platform are given by Fig. 57. One of these platforms
contains about 1,000 ft. B. M. of lumber. As will be seen, all
connections are bolted, no nails being used anywhere. A platform can
thus be taken down and stored or shipped and erected again on another
job with very little trouble.

The plant described handled some 22,000 cu. yds. of excavated material
on this work. Work was kept up night and day, working three 8-hour
shifts. It took an average of 35 shifts to excavate one row of caissons.
No figures of the working force or the cost of excavation of this work
are available.

_Mixing and Placing Concrete._--The placing of the concrete in the
excavated wells is done by means of tremies, or, which is more usual, by
simply dumping it in from the top, workmen going down to distribute it.
The manner of mixing the concrete and of handling it to the caisson
varies of course with almost every job. As an example of the better
arranged mixing and handling plants the one used on the Cook County
Court House work may be described. This plant is shown by the sketch,
Fig. 58.

Bins for the sand and stone were built at one side of the lot on the
sloping bank; their tops were level with the street surface and their
bottoms were just high enough to permit their contents to be delivered
by chutes into 1 cu. yd. cars. Wagons dumping through traps in the
platform over the bin delivered the sand and stone. The sketches
indicate the arrangement of the bins and mixer and the car tracks
connecting them. The raw material cars were first run under the stone
bin and charged with the required proportion of stone, and then to the
sand bin, where the required proportion of sand was chuted on top of the
stone. The loaded car was then hauled up the incline and dumped into the
hopper, where cement and water were added. A No. 2½ Smith mixer was used
and discharged into cars which delivered their loads on tracks leading
to the caissons. The same cars and portable tracks were used as had been
used to handle the excavated material. In operation a batch of raw
materials was being prepared in the hopper while the previous batch was
being mixed and while the concrete car was delivering the still previous
batch to the caissons. An average of 40 batches an hour mixed and put
into the caissons was maintained with a force of 25 men. In all some
17,000 cu. yds. of concrete were mixed and deposited.

[Illustration: Fig. 58.--Arrangement of Concrete Making Plant, Concrete
Pier Construction.]

_Cost of Caisson Work._--The following attempt to get at the cost of
caisson work is based largely upon information obtained from Mr. John M.
Ewen, John M. Ewen Co., Engineers and Builders, Chicago, Ill. Mr. Ewen
says:

"My experience has taught me that it is almost impossible to determine
any definite data of cost for this work. This is due to the fact that no
two caisson jobs will average the same cost, notwithstanding the fact
that the cost of material used and the labor conditions are exactly the
same. This condition is due to the great variety in texture of the soil
gone through. For instance, it has come under my experience that in
caissons of the same diameter on the same job it required but fifteen
8-hour shifts to reach bedrock in some of these, while it required as
many as 21 to 25 shifts to reach rock in the others, rock being at the
same elevation. In fact, the digging all the way to rock in some was the
best that could be wished for, while in the others boulders and
quicksand were encountered, and the progress was slower, and the cost
consequently greater.

"Again, we have known it to require eight hours for two men to dig 8
ins. in hardpan in one caisson, while on a job going on at the same time
and on the opposite corner of the street two men made progress of 2 ft.
in 8 hours through apparently the same stuff, the depth of hardpan from
grade being 61 ft. 6 ins. in both instances, and the quality of labor
exactly the same.

"There have been more heavy losses among contractors due to the
unexpected conditions arising in caisson digging than in any other item
of their work, and I predict a loss to some of them that will be serious
indeed if an attempt be made to base future bids for caisson work
entirely upon the data kept by them on past work. If a contractor is
fortunate enough to find the ordinary conditions existing in his caisson
work, and by ordinary conditions I mean few boulders, no quicksand,
ordinary hardpan and no gas, the following items may be considered safe
for figuring caisson work:

"Figure that it will require from 22 to 25 shifts of 8 hours each to
strike bedrock, bedrock being from 90 to 95 ft. below datum, and datum
being 15 ft. below street grade; figure 2 diggers to the shift in all
caissons over 5 ft. in diameter, 45 cts. per hour for each digger;
figure 1 top man at 40 cts. per hour, and 1 mucker or common laborer at
30 cts. per hour for all caissons in which there are two diggers, and 1
top man less if 1 digger is in the caisson, which condition exists
generally in caissons less than 5 ft. in diameter. Add the cost of
5/8-in. cable, tripods, sheaves, 1-in. Hauser laid line, nigger heads,
ball-bearing blocks, etc., for rigging of the job. Lagging, which is 2×6
ins. and 3×6 ins. hemlock or some hard wood, in length of 5 ft. 4 ins.
and 4 ft., is priced all the way from $20 to $22.50 and $21 to $24.50
per M. ft. B. M., respectively. The price of caisson rings is $2.40 per
100 lbs. The cost of specially made grubs for digging in hardpan is
about $26 per dozen. Shovels are furnished by the diggers themselves in
Chicago, Ill. The cost of temporary electric light is $10 per caisson.
This includes cost of cable, lamps, guards, etc. Add the cost of or
rental of engine or motors for power.

"Some engineers specify three rings to be used to each set of lagging
below the top set until hardpan is reached, then two rings for each of
the remaining sets from hardpan to rock. This is, of course, to insure
against disaster from great pressure of the swelling clay above the
hardpan strata, and may or may not be necessary. These rings are ¾×3
ins. wrought iron.

"For caissons which are not specified to go to rock, it is not
considered economical to rig up cable set-ups, but rather to use
windlass derricks. In this case 1-in. Hauser laid line is used as the
means of hoisting the buckets of clay out of the caisson, as is the case
in cable set-ups, hand power being used on the windlass derricks instead
of steam or electricity. The windlass derricks are made with four legs
out of 6×6-in. yellow pine lumber. The top piece is generally a piece of
3×6-in. lagging. The cost of windlass and boxes is about $35 per dozen.
Hooks for caisson buckets cost 45 cts. each. Caisson buckets cost $8
each.

"With the above approximate units as a basis, I have seen unit prices
given per lineal foot in caisson work which ranged all the way from $12
to $16.50 for 6-ft. diameter caissons, larger and smaller sized caissons
being graded in price according to their size. This unit price included
rings, lagging, concrete, power, light, labor, etc."

From the above data the following figures of cost can be arrived at,
assuming a 6-ft. caisson:

  Labor.                                Per day.
2 diggers in caisson, at $3.60            $ 7.20
1 top man, at $3.20                         3.20
1 mucker, at $2.40                          2.40
                                          ------
                                          $12.80

The depth sunk varies from 3½ to 8 ft. per 8-hour day, depending on the
material. Assuming an average of 4 ft., we have then 4 lin. ft. of
caisson, or 2.8 cu. yds. excavated at a labor cost of $12.80, which is
at the rate of $3.20 per lin. ft., or $4.57 per cu. yd. We now get the
following:

                                               Per lin. ft.
                                                   Caisson.
40 ft. B. M. (2×6-in. lagging) at $25                 $1.00
60 lbs. iron (¾×3-in. rings) at 2½ c.                  1.50
0.7 cu. yd. excavation at $4.57                        3.20
0.7 cu. yd. muck hauled away at $1                     0.70
0.7 cu. yd. concrete at $5                             3.50
Electric light                                         0.10
                                                     ------
  Total                                              $10.00

If 3×6-in. lagging is used add 50 cts. per lin. ft. of caisson.

~MOLDING PILES FOR DRIVING.~--Piles for driving are molded like columns in
vertical forms or like beams in horizontal forms. European constructors
have a strong preference for vertical molding, believing that a pile
better able to withstand the strain of driving is so produced; such
lamination as results from tamping and settling is, in vertical molding,
in planes normal to the axis of the pile and the line of driving stress.
Vertical molding has been rarely employed in America and then only for
molding round piles. The common belief is that horizontal molding is the
cheaper method. In the ordinary run of work, where comparatively few
piles are to be made, it is probably cheaper to use horizontal molds,
but where a large number of piles is to be made, the vertical method has
certain economic advantages which are worth considering.

[Illustration: Fig. 59.--Plant for Vertical Molding of Concrete Piles.]

Vertical molding necessitates a tower or staging to support the forms
and for handling and placing the concrete; an example of such a staging
is shown by Fig. 59. To counterbalance this staging, horizontal molding
necessitates a molding platform of very solid and rigid construction if
it is to endure continued and repeated use. In the matter of space
occupied by molding plant, vertical molding has the advantage. A tower
40 ft. square will give ample space around its sides for 80 vertical
forms for 12-in. piles and leaves 1 ft. of clear working space between
each pair of forms. The ground area occupied by this tower and the forms
is 1,764 sq. ft. With the same spacing of molds a horizontal platform
at least 25 × 160 ft. = 4,000 sq. ft., would be required for the molds
for the same number of piles 25 ft. long. For round piles, vertical
molding permits the use of sectional steel forms; horizontal forms for
round piles are difficult to manage. For square piles vertical molding
requires forms with four sides; horizontal forms for square piles
consist of two side pieces only, the molding platform serving as the
bottom and no top form being necessary. Thus, for square piles
horizontal molding reduces the quantity of lumber per form by 50 per
cent. The side forms for piles molded on their sides can be removed much
sooner than can the forms for piles molded on end, so that the form
material is more often released for reuse. The labor of assembling and
removing forms is somewhat less in horizontal molding than in vertical
molding. Removing the piles from molding bed to storage yard for curing
requires derricks or locomotive cranes in either case and as a rule this
operation will be about as expensive in plant and labor in one case as
in the other. In the ease and certainty of work in placing the
reinforcement, horizontal molding presents certain advantages, the
placing and working of the concrete around the reinforcement is also
easier in horizontal molding. Mixing and transporting the concrete
materials and the concrete is quite as cheap in vertical molding as in
horizontal molding. If anything, it is cheaper with vertical molding,
since the mixer and material bins can be placed within the tower or
close to one side where a tower derrick can hoist and deposit the
concrete directly into the molds. Car tracks, cars, runways and
wheelbarrows are thus done away with in handling the concrete from mixer
to molds. Altogether, therefore, the choice of the method of molding is
not to be decided off-hand.

~DRIVING MOLDED PILES.~--Driving molded concrete piles with hammer drivers
is an uncertain operation. It has been done successfully even in quite
hard soils and it can be done if time is taken and the proper care is
exercised. The conditions of successful hammer driving are: Perfect
alignment of the pile with the line of stroke of the hammer; the use of
a cushion cap to prevent shattering of the pile-head, and a heavy hammer
with a short drop. The pile itself must have become well cured and
hardened. At best, hammer driving is uncertain, however; shattered piles
have frequently to be withdrawn and the builder is never sure that
fractures do not exist in the portion of the pile that is underground
and hidden. The actual records of concrete pile work given in succeeding
sections illustrate successful examples of hammer driving. The plant
required need not vary from that ordinarily used for driving wooden
piles, except that more power must be provided for handling the heavier
concrete pile and that means must be provided for holding the pile in
line and protecting its head.

Sinking concrete piles by means of water jets is in all respect a
process similar to that of jetting wooden piles. Examples of jetting are
given in succeeding section. In rare cases, driving shells, or sheaths
have been used for driving molded piles.

~Method and Cost of Molding and Jetting Piles for an Ocean Pier.~--In
reconstructing in reinforced concrete the old steel pier at Atlantic
City, N. J., some 116 reinforced concrete piles 12 ins. in diameter were
molded in air and sunk by jetting. The piles varied in length with the
depth of the water, the longest being 34½ ft. Their construction is
shown by Fig. 60, which also shows the floor girders carried by each
pair of piles and forming with them a bent, and the struts bracing the
bents together. In molding and driving the piles the old steel pier was
used as a working platform.

[Illustration: Fig. 60.--Concrete Pile for Pier at Atlantic City, N. J.]

The forms for the piles were set on end on small pile platforms located
close to the positions to be occupied by the piles and were braced to
the old pier. The forms were of wood and the bulb point, the shaft and
the knee braces were molded in one piece. Round iron rods were used for
reinforcement. The concrete was composed of 1 part Vulcanite Portland
cement, 2 parts of fine and coarse sand mixed and 4 parts of gravel 1
in. and under in size. The mixture was made wet and was puddled into the
forms with bamboo fishing rods, which proved very efficient in working
the mixture around the reinforcing rods and in getting a good mortar
surface. The concrete was placed in small quantities; it was mostly all
hand mixed. The forms were removed in from 5 to 7 days, depending on the
weather.

The piles were planned to be sunk by water jet and to this end had
molded in them a 2-in. jet pipe as shown. They were sunk to depths of
from 8 ft. to 14 ft. into the beach sand. Water from the city water
mains at a pressure of 65 lbs. per sq. in. was used for jetting; this
water was furnished under special ordinance at a price of $1 per pile,
and a record of the amount used per pile was not kept. The piles were
swung from the molding platforms and set by derricks and block and fall.
The progress of jetting varied greatly owing to obstructions in places
in the shape of logs, old iron pipes, etc. In some cases several days
were required to get rid of a single pipe. In clear sand, with no
obstruction, a 12-in. pile could be jetted down at the rate of about 8
ft. per hour, working 1 foreman and 6 men. The following is the itemized
actual cost of molding and sinking a 26-ft. pile with bulb point and
knee braces complete:

                                                                Cost per
  Forms--                                                          pile.
Lumber, 340 ft. B. M. @ $30                          $10.20
Labor (carpenters @ $2.50 per day)                    12.00
Oil, nails, oakum, bolts, clamps, etc.                 1.20
                                                    -------
                                                     $23.40       $ 3.90
Times used                                                6
  Reinforcement--
275 lbs. of plain ¾-in. steel rods @ 2 cts. per lb.  $ 5.50
Preparing and setting, 4/10 ct. per lb.                1.10         6.60
  Jet Pipe--
26½ ft. of 2-in. pipe @ 10 cts. per ft. in place.                   2.65
  Setting Forms--
6 men @ $2.50 per day = $15, set 4 piles                            3.75
  Material--
90/100 Cu. yds. gravel @ $1.50 per yd.                 1.35
45/100 cu. yds. sand @ $1.50 per yd.                    .67
1.50 bbls. cement @ $1.60                              2.40         4.42
  Labor--
Concrete and labor foreman                             3.00
6 laborers, mixing and placing by hand, $1.75
each                                                  10.50
                                                    -------
                                                     $13.50         3.38
Average number of piles concreted per day                 4
  Removing Forms--
4 men @ $2.50 remove and clean in half day 4
  columns                                                           1.25
1 man @ $2.25 plastering column with cement
  grout (4 per day)                                                  .56
  Jetting 10 ft. into Sand--
Foreman                                              $ 3.00
4 men, $2.25 each, handling hose and traveler          9.00
                                                    -------
                                                     $12.00         3.00
Average number of piles jetted per day                    4
City water pressure used for jetting @ $1 per pile                  1.00
Superintendence @ $5.00 per day                                     1.25
Caring for trestle, traveler, material, etc.                        4.84
                                                                 -------
      Total cost per pile                                         $36.60

The pile being 26 ft. long, the cost in place was $1.41 per foot.
Subtracting the cost of sinking amounting to $7.09 per pile, we have the
cost of a 26-ft. pile molded and ready to sink coming to about $1.10 per
foot. It should be noted that this is the cost for a pile of rather
complicated construction; a plain cylindrical pile should be less
expensive.

~Method of Molding and Jetting Square Piles for a Building
Foundation.~--The foundation covered about an acre. The soil was a
deposit of semi-fluid mud and quicksand overlying a very irregular rock
bottom and encircled by a ledge of rock. The maximum depth of the mud
pocket was 40 ft., and interspersed were floating masses of hard pan.
Soundings were made at the locations of all piles; a ½-in. gas pipe was
coupled to a hose fed by city pressure and jetted down to rock, the
depth was measured, the sounding was numbered and the pile was molded to
length and numbered like the sounding. In all 414 piles were required,
ranging in length from 1½ to 40 ft.; all piles up to 6 ft. were built
in place in wooden forms. The piles were 13 ins. square and were of
1-2½-4 concrete reinforced with welded wire fabric. A tin speaking tube
was molded into each pile at the center. This tube was stopped about 10
ins. from the head and by means of an elbow and threaded nipple
projected through the side of the pile to allow of attaching a pressure
hose. The piles were handled to the pile driver, the hose attached and
water supplied at 100 lbs. pressure by a pump. Churning the pile up and
down aided the driving. A hammer was used to force the piles through the
hard pan layers. A wooden follower was used to protect the pile head. A
2,800-lb. hammer falling 20 ft. did not injure the piles. One pile was
given 300 blows with a 2,800-lb. hammer falling 12 ft., and when pulled
was unbroken. It was found that 30 ft. piles and under could be picked
up safely by one end; longer piles cracked at the center when so
handled. These long piles were successfully handled by a long chain, one
end being wrapped around the pile at the center and the other end
similarly wrapped near the head; the hook of the hoisting fall was
hooked into the loop of the chain and as the pile was hoisted the hook
slipped along the chain toward the top gradually up ending the pile. The
piles weighed 175 lbs. per lin. ft. It was attempted to mold the piles
directly on the ground by leveling it off and covering it with tar
paper, but the ground settled and the method proved impracticable.

~Method of Molding and Jetting Piles for Building Foundations.~--In a
number of foundations Mr. Frank B. Gilbreth has used a polygonal pile,
either octagonal or hexagonal, with the sides corrugated or fluted as
indicated in Fig. 61. In longitudinal section these piles have a uniform
taper from butt to point and have flat points. Each pile is cored in the
center, the core being 4 ins. in diameter at the top and 2 ins. at the
bottom end. On each of the octagon or hexagon sides the pile has a
half-round flute usually from 2½ to 3 ins. in diameter. The principal
object of these flutes or "corrugations" is to give passage for the
escape to the surface of the water forced through the center core hole
in driving the pile. They are also for the purpose of increasing the
perimeter of the pile and thereby gaining greater surface for skin
friction.

The piles are reinforced longitudinally and transversely. On this
particular job the reinforcement was formed with Clinton Electrically
Welded Fabric, the meshes being 3 ins.×12 ins.; the longer dimension
being lengthwise with the pile and of No. 3 wire; the horizontal or
transverse reinforcement being of No. 10 wire. The meshes being
electrically welded together, the reinforcement was got out from a wide
sheet taking the form of a cone. No part of the reinforcement was closer
than 1 in. from the outside of the concrete. In general only sufficient
sectional area of material is put in the reinforcement to take the
tensile stresses caused by the bending action when handling the pile
preparatory to driving; more reinforcement than this only being
necessary when the piles are used for wharves, piers or other marine
structures, where a considerable length of pile is not supported
sidewise or when they are subjected to bending stresses.

[Illustration: Fig. 61.--Cross-Section of Corrugated Reinforced Concrete
Pile.]

_Molding._--The forms for molding the piles are made from 2-in. stuff,
gotten out to the required dimensions, the corrugations being formed by
nailing pieces on the inside whose section is the segment of a circle.
The sides of the octagon are fastened to the ends through which the core
projects some 6 or 8 ins. At times while the molding of the pile is in
progress, the central core is given a partial turn to prevent the
setting of the cement holding it fast and thereby preventing the final
removal.

The stripping of the forms from the piles is usually done from 24 to 48
hours after molding, and from this time on great care is taken that
there is a sufficient amount of moisture in the pile to permit of the
proper action for setting of the cement. This is usually accomplished by
covering the piles over with burlaps and saturating with water from a
hose; the operation of driving the pile not being attempted until the
concrete is at least ten days old.

_Driving._--The operation of driving corrugated concrete piles is
somewhat similar to that for driving ordinary wooden piles by water jet,
but a much heavier hammer with less drop is used. The jetting is
accomplished by inserting a 2-in. pipe within the pile. This pipe is
tapered at the bottom end to 1-in. diameter, forming a nozzle, and the
water pressure used is about 120 lbs. per sq. in. As a rule, this
pressure is obtained by the use of a steam pump which may be connected
with the boiler which operates the pile driver, or with a separate steam
supply. At the upper end of this 2-in. pipe an elbow is placed and a
short length of pipe is connected to this and to the hose from the water
supply.

[Illustration: Fig. 62.--Cushion Cap for Driving Gilbreth Corrugated
Pile.]

As it is not practicable to drop the hammer directly on the head of the
concrete piles, the driving is accomplished by the use of a special cap,
Fig. 62. This cap is about 3 ft. in height and the bottom end fits over
the head of the pile. In one side of this cap is a slot from the outside
to the center, which permits the 2-in. pipe, which supplies the water
jet for driving the pile, to project. The outside of this cap is formed
with a steel shell, the inside has a compartment filled with rubber
packing and the top has a wooden block which receives a blow from the
hammer. In this way the head of the pile is cushioned, which prevents
the blow of the hammer from bruising or breaking the concrete.

During the operation of driving, the water from the jet comes up on the
outside of the pile and carries with it the material which it displaces
in driving. This, with the assistance of the hammer, allows the pile to
be driven in place, and, contrary to what might be supposed, after the
operation of driving when the water has saturated into the ground or
been drained away, this operation puddles the earth around the pile, so
that after a few hours' time the skin friction is much more than it
would be with the pile driven into more compact soil without the use of
a jet.

[Illustration: Fig. 63.--View Showing Method of Fabricating
Reinforcement for a Round Pile with Flattened Sides.]

~Method of Molding and Driving Round Piles.~--In constructing a warehouse
at Bristol, England, some 600 spirally-reinforced piles of the Coignet
type were used. Coignet piles are in section circles with two
longitudinal flat faces to facilitate guiding during driving; this
section is the same as would be found by removing two thin slabs from
opposite sides of a timber pile. The reinforcement consists of
longitudinal bars set around the periphery and drawn together to a point
at one end and then inserted into a conical shoe; these longitudinal
bars are wound spirally with a ¼-in. rod wire tied to the bars at every
intersection. This spiral rod has a pitch of only a few inches, but to
bind it in place and give rigidity to the skeleton it is wound by a
second spiral with a reverse twist and a pitch of 4 or 5 ft. As thus
constructed, the reinforcing frame is sufficiently rigid to bear
handling as a unit. The piles used at Bristol were 14 to 15 ins. in
diameter and 52 ft. long, and weighed about 4 tons gross each. The
mixture used was cement, river sand and crushed granite.

_Molding._--In molding Coignet piles the reinforcement is assembled
complete as shown by Fig. 63 and then suspended as a unit in a
horizontal mold constructed as shown by the cross-section Fig. 64. The
concrete is deposited in the top opening and rammed and worked into
place around the steel after which the opening is closed by the piece
A. After 24 hours the curved side pieces B and C are removed and
the pile is left on the sill D until hard enough to be shifted; a pile
is considered strong enough for driving when about six weeks old.

[Illustration: Fig. 64.--Form for Molding Round Pile with Flattened
Sides.]

_Driving._--Coignet piles at the Bristol work were handled by a
traveling crane. The material penetrated was river mud and they were
driven with a hammer weighing 2 tons gross; in driving the pile head was
encircled by a metal cylinder into which fitted a wooden plunger or
false pile with a bed of shavings and sawdust between plunger and pile
head.

~Molding and Driving Square Piles for a Building Foundation.~--The Dittman
Factory Building at Cincinnati, O., is founded on reinforced concrete
piles varying from 8 to 22 ft. in length. The piles were square in
cross-section, with a 2-in. bevel on the edges; a 16-ft. pile was 10
ins. square at the point and 14 ins. square at the head, shorter or
longer piles had the same size of point, but their heads were
proportionally smaller or larger, since all piles were cast in the same
mold by simply inserting transverse partitions to get the various
lengths. Each pile was reinforced by four ¾-in. twisted bars, one in
each corner, bound together by ¼-in hoops every 12 ins.. The bars were
bent in at the point and inserted in a hollow pyramidal cast iron shoe
weighing about 50 lbs. The concrete was a 1-2-4 stone mixture and the
pile was allowed to harden four weeks before driving. They were cast
horizontally in wooden molds which were removed after 30 hours.

_Driving._--Both because of their greater weight and because of the care
that had to be taken not to shatter the head, it took longer to adjust
and drive one of these concrete piles than it would take with a wooden
pile. The arrangement for driving the piles was as follows: A metal cap
was set over the head of the pile, on this was set the guide cap having
the usual wood deadener and on this was placed a wood deadener about 1
ft. long. The metal cap was filled with wet sand to form a cushion, but
as the pile head shattered in driving the sand cushion was abandoned and
pieces of rubber hose were substituted. With this rubber cushion the
driving was accomplished without material damage to the pile head. The
hammer used weighed 4,000 lbs. and the drop was from 4 to 6 ft. The
blows per pile ranged from 60 up. The average being about 90. In some
cases where the driving was hard it took over 400 blows to drive a
14-ft. pile. An attempt to drive one pile with a 16-ft. drop resulted in
the fracture of the pile.

~Method of Molding and Driving Octagonal Piles.~--The piles were driven in
a sand fill 18 ft. deep to form a foundation for a track scales in a
railway yard. They were octagonal and 16 ins. across the top, 16 ft.
long, and tapered to a diameter of 12 ins. at the bottom. They were also
pointed for about a foot. The reinforcement consisted of four ½-in.
Johnson corrugated bars spaced equally around a circle concentric with
the center of the pile, the bars being kept 1½ ins. from the surface of
the concrete. A No. 11 wire wrapped around the outside of the bars
secured the properties of a hooped-concrete column. The piles were cast
in molds laid on the side. They were made of 1:4½ gravel concrete, and
were seasoned at least three weeks before being driven.

An ordinary derrick pile driver, with a 2,500-lb. hammer falling 18 ft.,
was used in sinking them. A timber follower 6 ft. long and banded with
iron straps at both ends was placed over the head of the pile to receive
directly the hammer blows. The band on the lower end was 10 ins. wide
and extended 6 ins. over the end of the follower. In this 6-in. space a
thick sheet of heavy rubber was placed, coming between the head of the
pile and the follower. Little difficulty was experienced in driving the
piles in this manner, although 250 to 300 blows of the hammer were
required to sink each pile. The driving being entirely through fine
river sand there is every probability that any kind of piles would have
been driven slowly. The heads of the first 4 or 5 piles were battered
somewhat, but after the pile driver crew became familiar with the method
of driving, no further battering resulted and the heads of most of the
piles were practically uninjured.

[Illustration: Fig. 65.--Cross-Section of Chenoweth Rolled Pile.]

[Illustration: Fig. 66.--Diagram Showing Method of Rolling Chenoweth
Pile.]

~Method and Cost of Making Reinforced Concrete Piles by Rolling.~--In
molding reinforced concrete piles exceeding 30 or 40 ft. in length, the
problem of molds or forms becomes a serious one. A pile mold 50 or 60
ft. long is not only expensive in first cost, but is costly to maintain,
because of the difficulty of keeping the long lagging boards from
warping. To overcome these difficulties a method of molding piles
without forms has been devised and worked out practically by Mr. A. C.
Chenoweth, of Brooklyn, N. Y. This method consists in rolling a sheet of
concrete and wire netting into a solid cylinder on a mandril, by means
of a special machine. Fig. 65 is a sketch showing a cross-section of a
finished pile, in which the dotted line shows the wire netting, the
hollow circle is the gas pipe mandril, and the solid circles are the
longitudinal reinforcing bars.

[Illustration: Fig. 67.--Machine for Rolling Chenoweth Piles.]

In making the pile the netting is spread flat, with the reinforcing bars
attached as shown at (a), Fig. 66, and is then covered with a layer of
concrete. One edge of the netting is fastened to the platform, the other
edge is attached to the winding mandril. The winding operation is
indicated by sketch (b), Fig. 66. Fig. 67 shows the machine for
rolling the pile. It consists of a platform and a roll. The platform is
mounted on wheels and is so connected up that it moves back under the
roll at exactly the circumferential speed of the roll; thus the forming
pile is under constant, heavy pressure between the roll and platform.
When the pile has been completely rolled it is bound at intervals by
wire ties; the wire for these ties is carried on spools arranged under
the edge of the platform at intervals of 4 ins. for the first 10 ft.
from the point and of 6 ins. for the remainder of the length. The
binding is done by giving the pile two or three extra revolutions and
then cutting and tying the wire; then by means of a long removable shelf
which contains the flushing mortar, as the pile revolves it becomes
coated on the outside with a covering that protects the ties and other
surface metal. Finally the pile is rolled onto a suitable table to
harden.

An exhibition pile rolled by the process described is 61 ft. long and 13
ins. in diameter. This pile was erected as a pole by hoisting with a
tackle attached near one end and dragging the opposite end along the
ground exactly as a timber pole would be erected. It was also suspended
free by a tackle attached at the center; in this position the ends
deflected 6 ins. Neither of these tests resulted in observable cracks in
the pile. The pile contains eight 1-in. diameter steel bars 61 ft. long,
one 2½-in. pipe also 61 ft. long, 366 sq. ft., or 40.6 sq. yds. ½-in.
mesh 14 B. & S. gage wire netting, and 2 cu. yds. loose concrete. Its
cost for materials and labor was as follows:

  Materials--
Gravel, 28.8 cu. ft., at $1 per cu. yd.                   $ 1.05
Sand, 19.8 cu. ft., at $1 per cu. yd.                        .73
Cement, 3 bbls., at $1.60 per bbl.                          4.80
Netting, 40.6 sq. yds., at 17½ cts. per sq. yd.             7.10
Rods, wire, etc., 1,826 lbs., at 2½ cts. per lb.           45.65
                                                        --------
      Total                                               $59.33
Mixing 2 cu. yds. concrete, four men one hour, at 15 cts.
  per hour                                                $ 0.60
Placing concrete and netting, four men 30 mins., at 15
  cts. per hour                                              .30
Winding pile, four men 20 mins., at 15 cts. per hour         .20
Removing pile, four men 10 mins., at 15 cts. per hour        .10
                                                        --------
                                                           $1.20
     Grand total                                          $60.53

This brings the cost of a pile of the dimensions given to about $1 per
lin. ft.




CHAPTER XI.

METHODS AND COST OF HEAVY CONCRETE WORK IN FORTIFICATIONS, LOCKS, DAMS,
BREAKWATERS AND PIERS.


The construction problem in building concrete structures of massive form
and volume is chiefly a problem of plant arrangement and organization of
plant operations. In most such work form construction is simple and of
such character that it offers no delay to placing the concrete as
rapidly as it can be produced. The same is true of the character of the
structure, it is seldom necessary for one part of the work to wait on
the setting and hardening of another part. As a rule, there is no
reinforcement to fabricate and place and where there is it is of such
simple character as not to influence the main task of mixing, handling,
and placing concrete. Stated broadly, the contractor in such work
generally has a certain large amount of concrete to manufacture,
transport and deposit in a certain space with nothing to limit the
rapidity of these operations, except the limitations of plant capacity
and management. Installation and operation of mixing and conveying
plant, then are matters to be considered carefully in heavy concrete
work.

In the following sections we have given one or more examples of nearly
every kind of heavy concrete work excepting bridge foundations and
retaining walls, which are considered in Chapters XII and XIII, and
except rubble concrete work, which is considered in Chapter VI. In each
case so far as the available records made it possible, we have given an
account of the plant used and of its operation.

~FORTIFICATION WORK.~--Concrete for fortification work consists very
largely of heavy platforms and walls for gun foundations and enclosures
and of heavily roofed galleries and chambers for machinery and
ammunition. The work is very massive and in the majority of cases of
simple form. A large number of data are to be found in the reports of
the Chief of Engineers, U. S. A., on all classes of fortification work,
but the manner in which they are recorded makes close analysis of
relative efficiencies of methods or of relative costs almost impossible.
The following data are given, therefore, as examples that may be
considered fairly representative of the costs obtained in fortification
work done under the direction of army engineers; these data are not
susceptible of close analysis because wages, working force, outputs,
etc., are nearly always lacking.

~Gun Emplacements, Staten Island, N. Y.~--The work comprised 5,609 cu.
yds. of concrete in two 12-in. gun emplacements, and 3,778 cu. yds. of
concrete in two 6-in. gun emplacements. Concrete was mixed in a
revolving cube mixer with the exception of 809 cu. yds. in the 6-in.
emplacements which were mixed by hand at a cost of 56 cts. more per
cubic yard than machine mixing cost. The body of the concrete was a
1-3-5 Portland cement, beach sand and broken trap rock mixture. The
floors and upper surface of the concrete had a pavement consisting of 6
ins. of 1-3-5 concrete surfaced with 2 ins. of 1-3 mortar. Wages are not
given, but for the time and place should have been about $1.50 per
8-hour day for common labor. The cost of materials was:

Alpha Portland cement, per bbl.                   $1.98
Broken trap rock, per cu. yd.                      0.81
12-in. emplacement, hauling sand per cu. yd.       0.175
6-in. emplacement, hauling sand per cu. yd.        0.20

The cost of the concrete in place was as follows:

                                              12-in., per  6-in., per
  Body Concrete--                                cu. yd.     cu. yd.
Cement, at $1.98 per bbl.                        $2.546      $2.546
Broken stone, at 81 cts. per cu. yd.              1.041       1.041
Sand, at 17½ and 20 cts. per cu. yd.              0.225       0.257
Receiving and storing materials at 11.6 cts. per
 cu. yd. and 8.4 cts. per bbl.                    0.149       0.180
Mixing, placing and ramming                       0.879       1.110
Forms, lumber and labor                           0.477       0.950
Superintendence and miscellaneous                 0.190       0.150
                                                 ------      ------
      Total                                      $5.507      $6.234
  Concrete Pavement--
Materials                                        $2.97       $3.06
Labor                                             4.63        4.72
                                                 ------     ------
Total                                            $7.60       $7.78

[Illustration: Fig. 68.--Sketch Plans of Concrete Making Plant for
Mortar Battery Platform.]

~Mortar Battery Platform, Tampa Bay, Fla.~--The platform contained 8,994
cu. yds. of concrete composed of a mixture of Portland cement, sand,
shells and broken stone. The broken stone and cement were brought in by
vessel and the sand and shells were obtained from the beach near by. The
plant for the work was arranged as shown by the sketch, Fig. 68. Sand,
stone and shells were stored in separate compartments in the storage
bins. Box cars, divided into compartments of such size that when each
was filled with its proper material, the car would contain the proper
proportions for one batch of concrete, were pushed by hand under the
several compartments of the bin in succession until charged; then they
were hooked to a cable and hauled to the platform over the mixer and
dumped. The charge was then turned over with shovels and shoveled into
the hopper of a continuous mixer, located beneath. Two cars were used
for charging the mixer, running on separate tracks as shown. The mixer
discharged into buckets set on flat cars, which were hauled by mules
under the cableway, which then lifted and dumped the bucket and returned
it empty to the car. By using three bucket cars, one was always ready
to receive the mixer discharge as soon as the preceding one had been
filled, so that the mixer operated continuously. The cableway had a
working span of 270 ft., the cable being carried by traveling towers 69
ft. high; the cableway was very easily operated back and forth along the
work. The cableway complete, with 497 ft. of six-rail track for each
tower, cost $4,700. The cost of materials and labor for the 8,994 cu.
yds. of concrete was as follows:

                                      Per cu. yd.
1 bbl. cement at $2.46                      $2.46
0.89 cu. yd. stone, at $2.95                2.622
0.315 cu. yd. shells, at $0.45              0.142
0.51 cu. yd. sand, at $0.12                 0.062
Mixing and placing                          0.693
                                          -------
Total                                      $5.979

The above batch tamped in place to 30 cu. ft., or 1-1/9 cu. yds., which
gives the cost as follows:

                                         Per cu. yd.
Cost of concrete tamped in place              $5.381
Cost of form work                              0.370
                                             -------
Total cost                                    $5.751

In the preceding prices of cement and stone, 59 cts. and 29 cts. per
cubic yard, respectively, are included for storage. The costs of sand
and shells are costs of screening and storing. Rough lumber for forms
cost $10.25, and dressed lumber $12.75 per M. ft. B. M.

~Emplacement for Battery, Tampa Bay, Fla.~--The emplacement contained
6,654 cu. yds. of Portland cement, sand, shells and broken stone
concrete. The plant arrangement is shown by Fig. 69. The sand and shells
were got near the site, using an inclined cableway running from a 40-ft.
mast near the mixer to a deadman at the shell bank. All the sand for the
fill around the emplacement was obtained in the same way. The other
materials were brought by vessel to a wharf, loaded by derrick onto cars
operated by an endless cable, and taken to the work. The storage bins
and mixing plant were operated much like those for the mortar battery
work, previously described. A cube mixer was used, and the concrete was
handled from it to the work by a crane derrick covering a circle of 100
ft. in diameter. The cost of materials and concrete was as follows:

Cement, plus 7 cts. for storage per bbl.            $ 2.532
Stone, plus 38 cts. for storage per cu. yd.           3.047
Shells, excavating and storage.                       0.481
Sand, excavating and storage.                         0.250
Lumber, rough per M. ft. B. M.                       10.25
Lumber, dressed per M. ft. B. M.                     12.75

[Illustration: Fig. 69.--Sketch Plans of Concrete Making Plant for
Battery Emplacement.]

A batch made up as follows, tamped in place to a volume of 30 cu. ft. or
1-1/9 cu. yds.:

1 bbl. cement, at $2.532.                  $ 2.532
0.315 cu. yd. shells, at $0.481.             0.151
0.51 cu. yd. sand, at $0.25.                 0.130
0.89 cu. yd. stone, at $3.047.               2.710
Mixing and placing.                          0.761
                                          --------
      Total for 30 cu. ft.                 $ 6.284

This gives a cost per cubic yard of concrete in place as follows:

Concrete in place, per cu. yd.             $ 5.655
Forms, per cu. yd. of concrete.              0.220
                                          --------
     Total cost of concrete per cu. yd.    $ 5.875

~United States Fortification Work.~--The following methods and cost of
mixing and placing concrete by hand and by cubical mixers is given by
Mr. L. R. Grabill for U. S. Government fortification work done in 1899.

_Hand Mixing and Placing._--The work was done by contract, using a 1
cement, 2 sand, 2 pebbles and 3 stone mixture turned four times. A board
large enough for three batches at a time was used; one batch was being
placed, one being mixed and one being removed at the same time so that
the mixers moved without interval from one to the other. Two gangs were
worked, each mixing 64 batches of 0.75 cu. yd., or 48 cu. yds. of
concrete per day at the following cost:

                                            Per      Per
  Hand Mixing 9,000 Cu. Yds.--               day.  cu. yd.
6 men wheeling materials                  $ 7.50    $0.16
8 men mixing                               10.00     0.21
8 men wheeling away                        10.00     0.21
6 men placing and ramming                   7.50     0.16
1 pump man                                  1.25     0.02
1 waterboy                                  1.00     0.02
1 foreman                                   2.00     0.04
                                         -------  -------
      Totals                              $39.25    $0.82

The entire cost of plant for this work was about $500.

_Machine Mixing and Placing._--The concrete was mixed in a 4-ft. cubical
mixer operated by a 12 hp. engine which also hauled the material cars up
the incline to the mixer. These cars passed by double track under the
material bins where the compartments of the car body were filled through
trap doors; they then passed the cement house where the cement was
placed on the load, then up the incline to the mixer and dumped, and
then empty down an opposite incline. Seven turns of the mixer mixed the
charge which was discharged into iron tubs on cars hauled by horses to
two derricks whose booms covered the work. One gang by day labor mixed
and placed 168 batches of 0.7 cu. yd., or 117.6 cu. yds. per day at the
following cost:

                                               Per     Per
   Machine Mixing 4,000 Cu. Yds.--             day.   cu. yd.
32 men at $1.25                                $40.00   $0.34
1 pumpman                                        1.25    0.01
1 teamster and horse                             2.00    0.02
2 waterboys at $1                                2.00    0.02
1 engineman                                      1.70    0.02
1 derrickman                                     1.50    0.01
1 fireman                                        1.50    0.01
1 foreman                                        2.88    0.03
Fuel (cement barrels largely)                    1.25    0.01
                                              ------- -------
      Totals                                   $54.08   $0.47

The cost of the plant was about $5,000.

[Illustration: Fig. 70.--Concrete Making Plant for Constructing Lock
Walls, Cascades Canal.]

~LOCK WALLS, CASCADES CANAL.~--Four-fifths or 70,000 cu. yds. of lock
masonry was concrete, the bulk of which was mixed and deposited by the
plant shown by Fig. 70. The concrete was Portland cement, sand, gravel
and broken stone. Cement was brought in in barrels by railway, stored
and tested; from the store house the barrels were loaded onto cars and
taken 250 ft. to a platform onto which the barrels were emptied and from
which the cement was shoveled into the cement hopper and chuted to cars
which took it to the charging hopper of the mixer. The stone was crushed
from spalls and waste ends from the stone cutting yards, where stone for
wall lining and coping and other special parts was prepared. These
spalls and ends were brought in cars and dumped into the hopper of a
No. 5 Gates crusher, with a capacity of 30 tons per hour. From the
crusher the stone passed to a 2½-in. screen, the pieces passing going to
a bin below and the rejections going to a smaller Blake crusher and
thence to the bin. The dust and small particles were not screened out.
The sand and gravel were obtained by screening and washing pit gravel.
The gravel was excavated and brought in cars to the washer. This
consisted of a steel cylinder 2 ft. 6½ ins. in diameter and about 18 ft.
long, having an inclination of 1 in. per foot. An axial gudgeon
supported the cylinder at the lower end and it rested on rollers at the
other end and at an intermediate point. The gravel was fed by hopper and
chute into the upper end and into this same end a 3-in. perforated pipe
projected and extended to about mid-length of the cylinder. The cylinder
shell was solid and provided with internal fins for about half its
length from the feed end. For the remainder of its length nearly to the
end, the shell was perforated with 2½-in. holes. For a length of 4 ft.
beyond mid-point it was encircled by a concentric screen of 1/8-in.
holes, and this screen for 3 ft. of its length was encircled by another
screen of 30 meshes to the inch. The pit mixture fed into the cylinder
was gradually passed along by the combined inclination and rotation,
being washed and screened in the process. The sand fell into one bin and
the gravel into another, and the waste water was carried away by a
flume. The large stones passed out through openings at the lower end of
the shell and were chuted into cars. The cars came to the mixer as
clearly shown by Fig. 70.

The stone and gravel cars were side dump and the cement car was bottom
dump. The mixers were of the cube type 4 ft. on each edge and operated
by a 7×12-in. double cylinder engine at nine revolutions per minute. The
usual charge was 32 cu. ft. of the several ingredients, and it was found
that 15 revolutions requiring about 1½ minutes were sufficient for
mixing. The average work of one mixer was 17 batches or about 13 cu.
yds. per hour, but this could be speeded up to 20 batches per hour when
the materials were freely supplied and the output freely removed. Two
cars took the concrete from the mixer to the hopper, from which it was
fed to the work by chute. The hopper was mounted on a truck and the
chute was a wrought iron cylinder trussed on four sides and having a
45° elbow at the lower end to prevent scattering. The chute fed into a
car running along the wall and distributing the material. It was found
impracticable to move the chute readily enough to permit of feeding the
concrete directly into place. As the concreting progressed upward the
trestle was extended and the chute shortened. It was found that wear
would soon disable a steel chute so that the main trussed cylinder had a
smaller, cheaply made cylinder placed inside as a lining to take the
wear and be replaced when necessary.

The plant described worked very successfully. Records based on 9,614.4
cu. yds. of concrete laid, gave the following:

                                        Cu. yds.
Concrete mixed by hand                    1,777.0
Concrete mixed by machine                 7,837.4
Total concrete laid                       9,614.4
Concrete placed by derricks               2,372.0
Concrete placed by chute                  7,242.4
Concrete 1-2-4 mixture                      156.0
Concrete 1-3-6 mixture                    1,564.0
Concrete 1-4-8 mixture                    6,892.0

The average mixture was 1 cement, 3.7 sand, 4.8 gravel and 2.6 broken
stone. The average product was 1.241 cu. yds. concrete per barrel of
cement and 1.116 cu. yds. of concrete per cubic yard of stone and
gravel. The average materials for 1 cu. yd. of concrete were: Cement
0.805 bbl., sand 0.456 cu. yd., gravel 0.579 cu. yd., and stone 0.317
cu. yd.

The cost of these 9,614.4 cu. yds. of concrete in place was:

  Hand Mixed and Placed by Derrick--  Per cu. yd.
Labor mixing 1,777 cu. yds                $1,072
Repairs, fuel, etc                         0.016
                                          -------
Total cost mixing                         $1,088
Labor placing 2,372 cu. yds.               0.6025
Fuel, tramways, etc.                       0.1958
                                          -------
Total cost placing                        $0.7983

  Machine Mixed and Placed by Chute--
Labor mixing 7,837 cu. yds.                         $0.388
Repairs, fuel, etc                                   0.046
                                                    ------
Total cost mixing                                   $0.434
Labor placing 7,242 cu. yds                          0.414
Fuel, tramways, etc.                                 0.045
                                                    ------
Total cost placing                                  $0.459
  Materials and Supplies 9,614 cu. yds.--
Timbering                                           $0.145
Cement                                               3.289
Sand and gravel                                      1.073
Broken stone                                         0.536
Cement testing, repairs, etc.                        0.223
                                                    ------
Total                                               $5,266
  Plant and Superintendence, 9,614 Cu. Yds.--
Engineering, superintendence, repairs, etc.         $1,508
20% cost of plant                                    0.165
                                                    ------
Total                                               $1,673

The comparative cost of hand and machine mixing and handling was thus:

Item--                                    Hand.     Machine.

Mixing per cu. yd.                       $1.088     $0.434
Placing per cu. yd.                       0.798      0.459
Materials, etc., per cu. yd.              5.466      5.466
Plant, etc., per cu. yd.                  1.673      1.673
                                         ------     ------
Totals                                   $9.025     $8.032

The average total costs of all the concrete placed were:

Mixing per cu. yd.                     $0.555
Placing per cu. yd.                     0.543
Materials per cu. yd.                   5.266
Plant, etc., per cu. yd.                1.673
                                       ------
Total                                  $8.037

~LOCKS, COOSA RIVER, ALABAMA.~--The following methods and costs are given
by Mr. Charles Firth for constructing lock No. 31 for the Coosa River
canalization, Alabama. This lock is 420 ft. long over all, 322 ft.
between quoins, 52 ft. clear width, 14.7 ft. lift and 8 ft. depth of
water on sills; it contained 20,000 cu. yds. of concrete requiring
21,500 bbls. cement, half Alsen and half Atlas.

Figure 71 shows the concrete mixing plant, consisting of two 4×4 ft.
cube mixer, driven by a 10×16-in. engine. The top floor of the mixer
house stored the cement, 2,000 bbls. The concrete was a 1-3-5½ stone
mixture. Each mixer charge consisted of 3 cu. ft. cement, 9 cu. ft. sand
and 16.5 cu. ft. stone; the charge was turned over four times before and
six times after watering at a speed not exceeding eight revolutions per
minute. The average output of the plant was 200 cu. yds. per 8-hour day,
or 100 cu. yds. per mixer, but it was limited by the means for placing.

[Illustration: Fig. 71.--Concrete Mixing Plant for Lock Construction,
Coosa River, Alabama.]

The concrete was mixed dry, deposited in 6 to 8-in. layers, and rammed
with 30-lb. iron rammers with 6-in. square faces. For all exposed
surfaces a 6-in. facing of 1-3 mortar was placed by setting 2×12-in.
planks 4 ins. from the laggings, being kept to distance by 2×4-in.
spacers, placing and ramming the concrete behind them, then withdrawing
them, filling the 6-in. space with mortar and tamping it to bond with
the concrete. The walls were carried up in lifts, each lift being
completed entirely around the lock before beginning the next; the first
lift was 10.7 ft. high and the others 6 ft., except the last, which was
4.5 ft., exclusive of the 18-in. coping. The coping was constructed of
separately molded blocks 3 ft. long, made of 1-2-3 concrete faced with
1-1 mortar and having edges rounded to 3 ins. radius.

In constructing the forms a row of 6×8-in. posts 24 ft. long and 5 to 7
ft. apart was set up along the inside of each wall and a similar row of
posts 12 ft. long was set up along the outside. From the tops of the
short posts 6×8-in. caps reached across the wall and were bolted to the
long posts; these caps carried the stringers for the concrete car
tracks. The lagging consisted of 3×10-in. planks dressed on all sides.
The backs of the walls were stepped and as each step was completed the
rear 12-ft. posts were lifted to a footing on its top and carried in the
necessary distance. The front posts remained undisturbed until the wall
was completed. The lagging was moved up as the filling progressed. As no
tie bolts were permitted, these forms required elaborate bracing.

From the mixing plant, which was located on the bank above reach of
floods, the concrete cars were dropped by elevator to the level of the
track over the walls and then run along the wall and dumped onto
platforms inside the forms and just below the track. This arrangement
was adopted, because it was found that even a small drop separated the
stone from the mortar. The concrete was shoveled from the platforms to
place and rammed. The cars were bottom dumping with a single door hinged
at the side; this door when swinging back struck the track stringers and
jarred the form so that constant attention was necessary to keep it in
line. It would have been much better to have had double doors swinging
endwise of the car. Another point noted was that unless the track was
high enough to give good head room at the close of a lift the placing
and ramming were not well done.

The cost of 8,710 cu. yds. of concrete placed during 1895 by day labor
employing negroes at $1 per 8-hour day was as follows per cubic yard:

1 bbl. cement                                   $2.48
0.88 cu. yd. stone at $0.76                      0.67
0.36 cu. yd. sand at $0.34                       0.12
Mixing, placing and ramming                      0.88
Staging and forms                                0.42
                                                 ----
Total                                           $4.57

~LOCK WALLS, ILLINOIS & MISSISSIPPI CANAL.~--The locks and practically all
other masonry for the Illinois & Mississippi Canal are of concrete. The
following account of the methods and cost of doing this concrete work is
taken from information published by Mr. J. W. Woermann in 1894 and
special information furnished by letter. The decision to use concrete
was induced by the fact that no suitable stone for masonry was readily
available (the local stone was a flinty limestone, usually without bed,
or, at best, in thin irregular strata, and cracked in all directions
with the cracks filled with fire clay) while good sand and gravel and
good stone for crushing were plentifully at hand. The concrete work done
in 1893-4 comprised dam abutments, piers for Taintor gates and locks.

_Dam Abutments._--Four dam abutments were constructed, three of which
were L-shaped, with sides next to the river 40 ft. long and sides
extending into the banks 20 ft. long; the top thickness was 3 ft., the
faces were vertical and the backs stepped with treads of 14 to 16 ins.,
and the width of base was 0.4 of the height. Each of these abutments was
built in four 30-cu. yd. sections, each section being a day's work. The
forms consisted of 2×8-in. planks, dressed on both sides, 2×8-in. studs
spaced 2 ft. on centers and 4×6-in. braces. For the first two of the
four abutments, the forms were erected in sections, the alternate
sections being first erected and filled. When these sections had
hardened the forms were shifted to the vacant sections and lined up to
and braced against the completed sections. This method did not give well
aligned walls, so in subsequent work the forms were erected all at once.

The concrete was mixed by hand. The sand and cement were mixed dry,
being turned four times and spread in a layer Pebbles and broken stone
previously wetted were spread over the sand and cement and the whole
turned four times, the last turn being into wheelbarrows; about five
common buckets of water were added during the mixing. The mixture sought
was one that would ram without quaking. Two forms of rammers were used;
for work next to forms a 4×6-in. rammer and for inside work 6-in
diameter circular rammer weighing 20 lbs. The gang mixing and placing
concrete consisted usually of:

    Item.                                Per Day.    Per Cu. Yd.
2 handling cement and sand                 $ 3.00       $0.10
3 filling barrows with aggregate             4.50        0.15
8 mixing concrete                           12.00        0.40
2 shoveling concrete into barrows            3.00        0.10
5 wheeling concrete to forms                 7.50        0.25
1 spreading concrete                         1.50        0.05
5 tamping concrete                           7.50        0.25
                                           ------       -----
Total, 26 men                              $39.00       $1.30

These cubic yard costs are based on 30 cu. yds. of wall completed per
8-hour day. The cost in detail of two abutments containing 254 cu. yds.
was per cubic yard as follows:

     Item.                                          Per Cu. Yd.
1.65 bbls. Portland (Germania) cement                 $ 5.60
0.5 cu. yd. crushed stone                               2.07
0.24 cu. yd. gravel                                     0.59
0.53 cu. yd. sand                                       0.24
Lumber, forms, warehouses, platforms[D]                 0.55
Carpenter work[E] ($9 per M.)                           1.10
Mixing and placing                                      1.47
20 per cent. first cost of plant                        0.31
Engineering and miscellanies                            0.31
                                                      ------
Total                                                 $12.24

[Footnote D: Charging ¼ of first cost of $18 per M. ft.]

[Footnote E: Carpenters $3.50, laborers $1.50 per day; there was one
laborer to two carpenters.]

The large amount of cement 1.65 bbls. per cubic yard was due to facing
the abutments with 8 ins. of 1-2 mortar. The concrete in the body of the
wall was 1 cement, 2 sand, 2 gravel and 2 broken stone mixture. A dry
mixture was used and this fact is reflected in the cost of ramming, 25
cts. per cu. yd. The cost of mixing was also high.

[Illustration: Fig. 72.--Concrete Mixing Plant for Lock Walls, Illinois
& Mississippi Canal.]

_Piers for Taintor Gates._--The masonry at this point consisted of three
piers 6×30 ft., and two abutments 30 ft. long, 6 ft. thick at base and 4
ft. thick at top, with wing walls; it amounted to 460 cu. yds. The feet
of the inclined braces were set into gains in the horizontal braces and
held by an 8-in. lag screw; after the posts were plumbed a block was
lag-screwed at the upper end of each brace. These forms proved entirely
satisfactory. The cost of the work per cubic yard was as follows:

Item.                                            Per Cu. Yd.
1.45 bbls. Portland cement                         $4.330
0.55 cu. yd. crushed stone                          0.604
0.252 cu. yd. pebbles                               0.328
0.465 cu. yd. sand                                  0.419
40,000 ft. B. M. lumber (¼ cost of $16 per M.)      0.348
Carpenter work on forms                             0.780
Mixing and placing concrete                         1.909
20 per cent. cost of plant                          0.090
Miscellaneous                                       0.182
                                                    -----
Total                                               $8.99

_Mixing Plant._--The concrete for all the lock work of 1893-4 was mixed
by the plant shown by Figs. 72 and 73. The mixer plant proper consisted
of a king truss carried by two A-frames of unequal height; under the
higher end of the truss was a frame carrying a 4-ft. cubical mixer and
under the lower end a pit for a charging box holding 40 cu. ft. This
charging box was hoisted by ½-in. steel cable running through a pair of
double blocks as shown; the slope of the lower chord of the truss was
such that the cable hoisted the box and carried it forward without the
use of any latching devices. On two sides of the pit were tracks from
the sand and stone piles and on the other two sides were the cement
platform and water tank. The charging box dumped into the hopper above
the mixer and the mixer discharged into cars underneath. A 15-HP. engine
operated the hoist by one pulley and the mixer by the other pulley. Nine
revolutions of the mixer made a perfect mixture. The plant as
illustrated was slightly changed as the result of experience in
constructing the guard lock. The charging hopper was lowered 6 ins. and
the space between the mixer and lower platform reduced by 9 ins.;
diagonal braces were also inserted under the timbers carrying the mixer
axles. This plant cost for framing and erection $300 and for machinery
delivered $706. The crushing plant shown by Fig. 73 consisted of a No. 2
Gates crusher delivering to a bucket elevator.

[Illustration: Fig. 73.--Stone Crushing Plant for Lock Walls, Illinois &
Mississippi Canal.]

[Illustration: Fig. 74.--Forms for Guard Lock, Illinois & Mississippi
Canal.]

_Guard Lock._--The forms employed in constructing the guard lock are
shown by Fig. 74, and in this drawing the trestle and platform for the
concrete cars are to be noted. The walls were concreted in sections. A
batch of concrete consisted of 1 bbl. cement, 10 cu. ft. sand and 20 cu.
ft. crushed stone. The average run per 8-hour day was 40 batches of
facing and 60 batches concrete, representing 100 bbls. cement. The gang
worked was as follows:

Duty.                                   No. Men.    P. C. Cost.

Handling cement                               3           5.26
Filling and pushing sand car                  5           8.77
Filling and pushing stone car                 9          15.79
Measuring water                               1           1.75
Dumping bucket on top platform                3           5.26
Opening and closing door of mixer             1           1.75
Operating friction clutch                     1           1.76
Attending concrete cars under mixer           1           1.76
Dumping cars at forms                         2           3.51
Spreading concrete in forms                   3           5.26
Tamping concrete in forms                    10          17.54
Mixing mortar for facing                      6          10.53
Finishing top of wall                         2           3.51
Hauling concrete cars with 1 horse            1           3.51
Engineman operating hoist                     1           3.51
Engineman operating engine                    1           3.51
Foreman in charge of forms                    1           3.51
General foreman                               1           3.51
                                             --         ------
Total                                        52         100.00

The percentages of cost in this statement have been calculated by the
authors upon the assumption that each laborer received one-half as much
wages as each engineman, foreman and horse and driver per 8 hours, which
would make the total daily wages equivalent to the wages of 57 men.
Wages of common labor were $1.50 per day. Considering the size of the
gang the output of 40 batches of mortar and 60 batches of concrete per
day was very small. The total yardage of concrete in the guard lock was
3,762 cu. yds., 2,212 cu. yds. in the walls and 1,550 cu. yds. in
foundations, culverts, etc. Its cost per cubic yard was made up as
follows:

     Item.                                   Total.    Per Cu. Yd.

5,246 bbls. Portland cement                 $15,604}
                                                   }        $4.170
152 bbls. natural cement                         84}
2,910 cu. yds. stone                          2,901          0.771
126 cu. yds. pebbles                            113}
                                                   }         0.401
1,970 cu. yds. sand                           1,398}
145,000 ft. B. M. lumber (¼th cost)             659          0.175
Iron for forms, trestles, etc.                   90          0.024
Coal, oil, miscellaneous                        327          0.087
Carpenter work                                2,726          0.724
Mixing and placing concrete                   6,693          1.780
Pumping, engineering, misc.                     742          0.197
20 per cent of plant                            550          0.146
                                            -------         ------
Total                                       $31,887         $8.475

[Illustration: Fig. 75.--Forms for Regular Lock Walls, Illinois &
Mississippi Canal.]

_Lock No. 37._--The character of the forms used in constructing the lock
walls is shown by Fig. 75. The walls were built in sections and work was
continuous with three 8-hour shifts composed about as specified for the
guard lock work except that one or two men were added in several places
making the total number 58 men. The average output per shift was 65
batches of concrete and 31 batches of facing mortar. The cost of the
work, comprising 3,767 cu. yds., was as follows:

Item.                                     Total.   Per Cu. Yd.

4,564 bbls. Portland cement              $14,181        $3.764
2,460 cu. yds. crushed stone               4,521         1.200
250 cu. yds. pebbles                         325         0.086
1,750 cu. yds. gravel                      2,335         0.619
450 cu. yds. sand                            450         0.119
180,000 ft. B. M. lumber (¼th cost)          990         0.236
Fuel, light, repairs, etc.                 1,171         0.311
Carpenter work                             2,526         0.671
Pumping                                      270         0.071
Mixing and placing concrete                6,170         1.632
20% cost of plant                            730         0.193
                                         -------        ------
Total                                    $33,669        $8.902

_Lock No. 36._--The forms used were of the construction shown by Fig.
75. Three shifts were worked, each composed as specified for the guard
lock, except that the number of tampers and spreaders was doubled,
bringing the gang up to 65 men. The average output per gang per shift
was 76 batches of concrete and 35 batches of facing mortar. The cost of
2,141 cu. yds. of concrete in this lock was as follows:

Item.                                       Total.   Per Cu. Yd.

3,010 bbls. Portland cement                $9,057          $4.23
1,377 cu. yds. broken stone                 1,922           0.90
393 cu. yds. pebbles                          354           0.17
459 cu. yds. gravel                           310           0.15
500 cu. yds. sand                             889           0.42
150,000 ft. B. M. lumber (¼th cost)           600           0.28
Fuel, light, repairs, etc.                    253           0.68
Carpenter work                              1,472           0.11
Mixing and placing concrete                 3,897           1.82
20% cost of plant                             650           0.30
                                          -------          -----
Total                                     $19,404          $9.06

The preceding data, made public by Mr. Woermann in 1894, are
supplemented by the following information prepared for the authors:

"If any criticism was to be made of the concrete masonry erected in 1893
and 1894, it would probably be to the effect that it was too expensive.
The cost of the masonry erected during those two seasons was $8 to $9
per cu. yd. Our records showed that about 45 per cent. of this cost was
for Portland cement alone, and moreover, that 40 per cent. of the total
cement used at a lock was placed in the 8-in. facing and 5-in. coping.
So in the seven locks erected in 1895 on the eastern section, the facing
was reduced to 3 ins. and the proportions changed from 1-2 to 1-2½.

"In 1898 this cost received another severe cut, and Major Marshall's
instructions stated that the facing should not exceed 1½ ins. in
thickness nor be less than ¾-in., while the layer of fine material on
top of the coping was to be only sufficient to cover the stone and
gravel. The amount of sand was again increased so that the proportions
were 1-3.

"The cost of the Portland cement concrete was likewise cheapened by
increasing the amount of aggregates. On the earlier work the proportions
were 1-2-2-3, while on the work in 1898 the proportions were 1-4-4. The
cost of the walls was further cheapened by using Utica cement in the
lower steps of the wall, with 2 ft. of Portland cement concrete on the
face. The proportions used in the Utica cement concrete were 1-2½-2½.
This lower step is one-third of the height, or about 7 ft.

[Illustration: Fig. 76.--Sketch Showing Method of Attaching Lagging to
Studs, Illinois & Mississippi Canal.]

"The forms were of the same character as those used on the first locks,
except that for lining the inner face, 3×10-in. hard pine planks were
substituted for the 4×8-in. white pine. The hard pine was damaged less
by the continuous handling, and the cost was practically the same. There
was also an important change made in the manner of fastening the plank
to the 8×10-in. posts. A strip 1¾ ins. square was thoroughly nailed to
each post, once for all, with 20d. spikes, and the planking was then
nailed from the outside, as shown in Fig. 76. This kept the face of the
plank in a perfectly smooth condition, and prevented the formation of
the little knobs on the face of the concrete which represented all the
old nail holes. This style of forming was also easier to take apart
after the setting of the concrete. Rough pine planks, 2×12-in., were
used for the back of the form, the same as before.

"In order to keep ahead of the concrete force it was necessary to use
two gangs of carpenters, erecting the forms for the next two locks. Each
gang consisted of about 20 carpenters (at $2.25) and 10 helpers (at
$1.50); but men were transferred from one to the other, according to the
stage of completion of the two locks. In addition to these two gangs,
two carpenters were on duty with each concrete shift to put in the steps
in the back of the forms. Sufficient lumber was required for the forms
for three complete locks, and 14 locks (Nos. 8 to 21) were built.

"The same type of mixer has been used as on the earlier work at Milan,
namely, a 4-ft. cubical steel box mounted on corners diagonally
opposite. On account of the greater number of locks to be built on the
eastern section, however, two mixers were found necessary, so that while
the concrete force was at work at one lock, the carpenters and helpers
were erecting the mixer at the next lock. The facing was mixed by hand.
After turning over the dry cement and sand at least twice with shovels,
the mixture was then cast through a No. 5 sieve, after which the water
was incorporated slowly by the use of a sprinkling can so as to avoid
washing. The secret of good concrete, after the selection of good
materials, is thorough mixing and hard tamping. Each batch of concrete,
consisting of about 1.2 cu. yds. in place, was turned in the mixer for
not less than 2 mins. at the rate of 9 revolutions per minute. The
amount of tamping is indicated by the fact that about 16 men out of 72
on each shift did nothing but tamp. The rammers used were 6 ins. square
and weighed 33 lbs. The bottom of the rammer consisted of three ridges,
each 1-in. in height, so as to make more bond between the successive
layers.

"On the eastern section the top of the lock walls was higher above the
ground, as a rule, than at the Milan locks, and the cars were run up an
incline with a small hoisting engine. A 15-HP. portable engine and
boiler operated the bucket hoist from one pulley, the mixer from the
other pulley, and also furnished steam for the hoist which pulled the
cars up the incline. The incline made an angle of about 30° with the
ground. The practice of carrying on two sections at once was continued
the same as on the western section. Each main wall was systematically
divided into 11 sections, making each section about 20 ft. long. The
corners of the coping were dressed to a quadrant of about 3 ins. radius
with a round trowel like those used on cement walks. In fact, the whole
method of finishing the coping was the same as is used on concrete
walks. The mortar was put on rather wet and then allowed to stand for
about 20 mins. before finishing. This allowed the water to come to the
surface and prevented the formation of the fine water cracks which are
sometimes seen on concrete work. After its final set the coping was
covered with several inches of fine gravel which was kept wet for at
least a week.

"The last concrete laid during the season was in November, on Lock No.
21, and Aqueducts Nos. 2 and 3. Portions of these structures were built
when the temperature was below freezing. The water was warmed to about
60° or 70° F., by discharging exhaust steam into the tank. Salt was used
only in the facing, simply sufficient to make the water taste saline.
The maximum amount used on the coldest night when the temperature was
about 20° F. was 1½ per cent.

The concrete force on each shift was as follows:

                                                Men.

Filling and pushing stone car                     10
Filling and pushing gravel car                     8
Measuring cement                                   3
Measuring water and cleaning bucket                2
Dumping bucket on top platform                     2
Operating mixer                                    2
Loading concrete cars                              1
Pushing and dumping cars on forms                  3
Switchmen on forms                                 2
Spreading concrete in forms                       12
Tamping concrete in forms                         16
Mixing facing                                      3
Water boys                                         2
                                                  --
Total laborers                                    66
Operating hoists                                   2
Finishing coping                                   2
Fireman                                            1
Sub-overseers                                      2
Overseer                                           1
                                                  --
Total force                                       74

The cost of material and labor at Lock No. 15 (10-ft. lift), which
contains 2,559 cu. yds. of concrete, was as follows:

Materials.                                         Per cu. yd.

0.56 bbl. Portland cement (0.96 per cu. yd.)           $1.42
0.64 bbl. Utica cement (1.58 per cu. yd.)                .30
0.58 cu. yd. stone                                      1.15
0.60 cu. yd. gravel                                      .52
14 ft. B. M. lumber[F] at $15 per M.                     .21
0.6 lb. spikes                                           .01
Coal (10 tons in all, at $1.70)                          .01
0.35 gal. kerosene                                       .03
                                                       -----
Total materials                                        $3.65

Labor.

Erecting forms ($7 per M.)                                      .45
Removing forms ($2 per M.)                                      .13
Erecting and removing mixer ($161)                              .06
Loading and unloading materials at yards and lock sites         .23
Track laying ($86)                                              .03
Train service (narrow gage road)                                .09
Delivering materials to mixer                                   .28
Mixing concrete                                                 .11
Depositing concrete                                             .21
Tamping concrete                                                .21
Mixing, depositing and tamping, 69 cu. yds. face mortar
($160)                                                          .23
General construction ($553)                                     .22
                                                              -----
Total labor                                                   $2.25

[Footnote F: The lumber was used nearly five times, which accounts for
its low cost per cu. yd.]

There were 1,430 cu. yds. of Portland cement concrete. 69 cu. yds. of
Portland cement mortar facing, and 1,059 cu. yds. of Utica cement
concrete. The Portland concrete cost $6.43 per cu. yd.; the Utica
concrete, $4.77 per cu. yd. The following is the cost of labor on Lock
No. 20 (11-ft. lift.; 2,750 cu. yds.):

                                                         Per cu. yd.

Erecting forms ($7 per M.)                                     $.434
Removing forms ($1.70 per M.)                                   .113
Erecting and removing mixer ($151)                              .058
Loading and unloading at yards, lock sites, etc.                .614
Tracks                                                          .024
Train service (narrow gage)                                     .016
Pumping                                                         .114
Delivering material to mixer                                    .288
Mixing concrete                                                 .134
Depositing concrete                                             .205
Tamping concrete                                                .192
Mixing, depositing and tamping, 85 cu. yds. face
mortar                                                          .071
General construction                                            .246
                                                              ------
Total                                                         $2.509

~COST OF HAND MIXING AND PLACING, CANAL LOCK FOUNDATION.~--Mr. Geo. P.
Hawley gives the following record of mixing and placing 4,000 cu. yds.
of 1-4½ gravel concrete for the foundation of a lock constructed for the
Illinois and Mississippi Canal in 1897. The concrete was mixed on
14×16-ft. board platforms, from which it was shoveled directly into
place. The materials were brought to the board in wheelbarrows. Two
boards were used, the usual gang for each being 4 men wheeling gravel, 4
men mixing, 1 man sprinkling, 2 men depositing and leveling and 2 men
tamping. The two gangs were worked against each other. Ten hours
constituted a day's work, and the average time and cost per cubic yard
for mixing and placing were:

                                                    Cts.

Foreman, 0.21 hr., at 30 cts                        6.30
Laborers, 3.339 hrs., at 15 cts                    50.09
Pump runner, 0.129 hr., at 20 cts                   3.58
Water boy, 0.087 hr., at 7½ cts                     0.65
                                                   -----
Total labor per cu. yd., cents.                    60.62

~BREAKWATER AT MARQUETTE, MICH.~--The breakwater extends out from the
shore and consists of a prism of concrete resting on timber cribs filled
with stone. Originally the cribs carried a timber superstructure; this
was removed to give place to the concrete work. A typical cross-section
of the concrete prism is shown by Fig. 77; the prism is 23 ft. wide on
the base. Farther in shore the base width was reduced to 20 ft., and in
the shore section the prism was changed to a triangular trapezoid by
continuing the first slope to the bottom cutting off the berm and second
slope. The wooden structure was removed to a level 1 ft. below mean low
water and on it a concrete footing approximately 2 ft. thick was
constructed for the prism proper. This footing reached the full width of
the crib and was constructed in various ways during the 5 years through
which the work continued. At first the footing concrete was deposited
loose under water by means of bottom dumping buckets; later the stone
filling of the cribs was simply leveled up by depositing concrete in
bags, and last toe and heel blocks were molded and set flush with the
sides of the crib and filled between. Methods of construction and
records of cost are reported for portions only of the work and these are
given here.

[Illustration: Fig. 77.--Cross Section of Marquette Breakwater.]

_Footing Placed under Water with Buckets._--Besides the material track
which was constructed along the old wooden structure the plant
consisted of a mixing scow and a derrick scow, which were moored
alongside the work. The sand, stone and cement were brought out in cars
between working hours and stored on the mixing scow, enough for one
day's work at a time. The derrick handled a 40-cu. ft. bottom dump
bucket, which sat in a well on the mixing scow with its top flush with
the deck. The concrete was mixed by hand on the deck and shoveled into
the bucket; the bucket was then handled by the derrick to the crib and
lowered and dumped under water. The gang consisted of 24 men, 1 foreman,
1 master laborer, 14 men shoveling and mixing, 3 men wheeling materials,
1 derrick man and 3 men placing and depositing concrete. No record of
output of this gang is available. The cost of the concrete in place with
wages $1.25 to $1.40 per day for common labor is given as follows:

Materials.                                    Per cu. yd.

1.21 bbls. (459 lbs.) cement at $2.20            $2.657
1 cu. yd. stone at $1.58                          1.580
0.5 cu. yd. sand at $0.50                         0.250
2.02 lbs. burlap at $0.037                        0.075
Twine and needles                                 0.005
                                                 ------
Total materials                                  $4.567

Labor.

Loading scow with materials                      $0.4114
Mixing concrete                                   0.8459
Depositing concrete                               0.5242
                                                 -------
Total labor                                      $1.7815
Grand total                                       $6.348

These figures are based on some 757 cu. yds. of concrete footing. In
explanation of the items of burlap, etc., it should be said that the
cribs were carpeted with burlap to prevent waste of concrete into the
stone fill.

[Illustration: Fig. 78.--Cross Section of Marquette Breakwater Showing
Manner of Constructing Footing with Bags of Concrete.]

_Leveling Off Cribs with Concrete in Bags._--The sketch, Fig. 78, shows
the method of leveling off the cribs with concrete in bags. The concrete
was mixed by hand on shore and filled into 8-oz. burlap bags, 6 ft. long
and 80 ins. around, holding 2,000 lbs. The bags were filled while lying
in position in a skip holding one bag. A skip was lifted by gallows
frame and tackle onto a car and run out to the work where the derrick
scow handled the skip to the crib, lowered it into the water and dumped
the bag. The cost of making and placing some 375 cu. yds. of concrete in
bags is given as follows:

Materials.                                   Total.       Per cu. yd.

453 bbls. cement at $2.627                 $1,190.03           $3.173
375 cu. yds. stone at $1.619                  607.13            1.619
180 cu. yds. sand at $0.392                    70.56            0.188
3,220 yds. burlap at $0.03304                 106.39            0.283
Twine and needles                               6.36            0.017
                                           ---------           ------
Total materials                            $1,980.47           $5.280

Labor Mixing.

108 hrs. master laborer at $0.21-7/8        $  23.42           $0.062
1,750 hrs. labor at $0.175                    306.25            0.816
Superintendence                                12.55            0.033
                                            --------           ------
Total labor mixing                          $ 342.22           $0.911

Labor transporting.

306 hrs. labor at $0.175                    $  53.55           $0.142
Superintendence                                 5.25            0.014
                                            --------           ------
Total labor transporting.                   $  58.80           $0.156

Labor Depositing.

108 hrs. engineman at $0.25                 $  27.00           $0.072
108 hrs. master laborer at $0.21-7/8           23.42            0.062
510 hrs. labor at $0.175                       89.25            0.238
Superintendence                                13.25            0.035
                                            --------           ------
Total labor depositing                      $ 152.92           $0.407
Grand total labor                           $ 553.94           $1.477
Grand total materials and labor            $2,534.41           $6.757

_Molding Footing Blocks._--The blocks used at the toe of the prism were
of the form and dimensions shown by Fig. 79. They were molded in a
temporary shed heated to 50° to 65° F., and provided with a 2×8-in.
dressed plank floor on 12×12-in. sills. The floor formed the bottoms of
the block molds. Four molds were used, each consisting of four sides.
Three laborers molded one block, 2.22 cu. yds. per day, wheeling,
mixing, erecting and removing forms, placing concrete and doing all
other work. The cost of making 40 blocks was recorded as follows:

Materials.                                       Total.   Per cu. yd.

126 bbls. cement at $2.75                       $346.50        $3.893
88.9 cu. yds. screenings at $1.10                 97.79         1.098
40.1 cu. yds. sand at $0.45                       18.04         0.203
5 gals. oil at $0.65                               3.25         0.036
                                                -------        ------
Total materials                                 $465.58        $5.230

Labor.

1,000 hrs. labor at $0.125                      $125.00        $1.404
Watchman                                          29.15         0.327
Labor cutting wood for fuel                       23.80         0.267
Superintendence                                   42.66         0.480
                                                -------        ------
Total labor                                     $220.61        $2.478
Total labor and materials                       $686.19        $7.708

[Illustration: Fig. 79.--Details of Toe Blocks for Footing, Marquette
Breakwater.]

_Molding Concrete Prism in Place._--The concrete prism was molded in
alternate sections 10 ft. long; the form for the isolated sections
consisted of eight pieces so constructed that when assembled in place
and secured with bolts and turnbuckles the form was self-contained as to
strength and required no outside support or bracing. The form once in
place, all that remained to be done was to fill it, the block with the
gallery through it being molded in one operation. The forms for the
connecting blocks consisted of two slope panels, a panel for the harbor
face and the gallery form, the blocks previously molded making the other
sides of the form. The concrete was mixed by hand on shore, conveyed to
the work in 1 cu. yd. cars and shoveled into the forms, where it was
rammed with 35-lb. rammers. The following record covers 1,231 cu. yds.
of concrete prism. In this concrete some 214 cu. yds. of rubble stone
were embedded. The costs given are as follows:

                                                               Per
Materials--                                        Total.     cu. yd.

1,780 bbls. natural cement at $1.068            $1,901.04      $1.545
963½ cu. yds. stone at $1.619                    1,559.91       1.267
53½ cu. yds. screenings at $0.392                   20.97       0.017
485.6 cu. yds. sand at $0.392                      190.36       0.154
Miscellaneous materials                             78.15       0.063
                                                ---------      ------
Totals                                          $3,750.43      $3.046

Labor Mixing--
254 hrs. master laborer at $0.21-7/8              $  55.56     $0.045
4,470 hrs. labor at $0.175                          782.42      0.635
Superintendence                                      18.20      0.015
                                                  --------     ------
Total labor mixing                                $ 856.18     $0.695

Labor Transporting and Placing--
35 days overseer at $2.33-1/3                     $  81.67     $0.066
1,949 hrs. labor at $0.175                          342.07      0.277
Superintendence                                      34.98      0.028
                                                   -------     ------
Total labor transporting and placing              $ 458.72     $0.371
Grand total, labor                               $1,314.90      1.066
Total labor and materials                        $5,065.33      4.112

No charge is made under materials for rubble stone as the only cost for
this was cost of handling and this is included in transporting and
placing.

~BREAKWATER, BUFFALO, N. Y.~--The following methods and costs of mixing
and placing some 2,561 cu. yds. of concrete are given by Mr. Emile Low,
for 10 parapet wall sections and 17 parapet deck sections for a
breakwater at Buffalo, N. Y.

The concrete used was a 1 cement, 1 gravel, 1 sand grit and 4 unscreened
broken stone. One bag of cement was assumed to measure 0.9 cu. ft. The
voids in the sand grit and gravel were 27 per cent. and in the
unscreened stone 39 per cent. The hardened concrete weighed 152 lbs. per
cu. ft.

[Illustration: Fig. 80.--Sketch Plan of Concrete Mixing Plant for
Buffalo Breakwater.]

Figure 80 shows the arrangement of the mixing plant. The mixer was a
5-ft. cube mixer holding 125 cu. ft., mounted on a trestle and operated
by a 9×12-in. horizontal engine taking steam from a 4×10-ft. locomotive
boiler, also supplying steam to two derrick engines. The material scow
contained two pockets for sand, one for gravel and one housed over for
cement. Two inside cement men passed out the bags in lots of six to one
outside cement man who cut and emptied them into the charging bucket.
Three sand shovelers each loaded a 3.6 cu. ft. barrow and wheeled them
tandem to the bucket, and two gravel men each loaded a 2.7 cu. ft.
barrow and wheeled them tandem to the bucket. The broken stone was
loaded by eight shovelers into another bucket, also containing 21.6 cu.
ft. The two buckets were alternately hoisted and emptied into the mixer
hopper, there being a dump man on the mixer who dumped the buckets and
attended to the water supply. A charger put the mixer in operation and
when the charge was mixed the car men dumped it into a skip resting on
a small car which was then run out on the track under the mixer to the
derrick which handled the skip to the work. Derrick A handled the
materials from the scows and derrick B handled the mixed concrete. The
force on the derricks consisted of two enginemen, four tagmen and the
fireman.

The ten parapet wall sections containing 841 cu. yds. were built in 46
hours, making 17 batches of 1.07 cu. yds., or 18.2 cu. yds. placed per
hour. The 17 parapet deck sections containing 1,720 cu. yds. were built
in 88 hours, making 18.8 batches of 1.08 cu. yds., or 19.5 cu. yds.
placed per hour. For the parapet deck work the force was increased by 2
men handling materials and 1 man on the mixer. The labor cost of mixing
and placing the concrete was as follows:

                                    Per        Per
Loading Gang--                      day.     cu. yd.

1 assistant foreman                 2.00    $0.011
3 cement handlers                   5.25     0.029
3 sand shovelers                    5.25     0.029
2 gravel shovelers                  3.50     0.020
8 stone shovelers                  14.00     0.076
1 hooker on                         1.75     0.010
                                  ------    ------
Totals                            $31.75    $0.175

Mixer Gang--
1 dumpman                         $ 1.75    $0.010
1 charging man                      1.75    0.010
2 car men                           3.50    0.020
2 enginemen at $3.25                6.50    0.035
4 tagmen at $2                      8.00    0.044
1 fireman                           2.00    0.011
                                  ------    ------
Totals                            $23.50    $0.130

Wall Gang--
1 Signalman                       $ 1.75    $0.010
1 dumper                            1.75    0.010
6 shovelers at $2                  12.00    0.065
4 rammers                           7.00    0.038
1 foreman                           4.00    0.022
                                  ------    -----
Totals                            $26.50   $0.145
Grand totals                      $81.75   $0.450

[Illustration: Fig. 81.--Concrete Blocks for Pier at Port Colborne
Harbor.]

[Illustration: Fig. 82.--Forms for Molding Blocks, Port Colborne Harbor
Pier.]

[Illustration: Fig. 83.--Device for Handling Blocks, Port Colborne
Harbor Pier.]

~PIER CONSTRUCTION, PORT COLBORNE, ONT.~--In constructing the new harbor
at Port Colborne, Ont., on Lake Erie, the piers consisted of parallel
rows of timber cribs set the width of the pier apart and filled in and
between with stone blasted and dredged from the lake bottom in deepening
the harbor. The tops of the cribs terminated below water level and were
surmounted by concrete walls set on the outer edges. These walls were
filled between with stone and the top of the filling was floored part
way or entirely across, as the case might be, with a thick concrete
slab. The footings of the walls to just above the water level were made
of concrete blocks 4½×4×7 ft., constructed as shown by Fig. 81. The wall
above the footing course and the floor slab were of concrete molded in
place. The concrete work consisted of molding and setting concrete
blocks and of molding concrete wall and slab in place.

The blocks were molded on shore, shipped to the work on scows and set in
place by a derrick. Figure 82 shows the construction of the forms for
molding the blocks; the bottom tie rods passed through the partitions
forming the ends of the molds. The sides were removed in 48 hours and
used over again. Figure 83 shows the hooks used for handling the molded
blocks. Considerable trouble was had in setting these blocks level and
close jointed, owing to the difficulty of leveling up the stone filling
under water.

[Illustration: Fig. 84.--Scow Plant for Mixing and Placing Concrete,
Port Colborne Harbor Pier.]

The mass concrete was mixed and placed by the scow plant, shown by Fig.
84. The scow was loaded with sufficient sand and cement for a day's work
and towed to and moored alongside the pier. Forms were set for the wall
on top of the block footing. These forms were placed in lengths of 60 to
75 ft. of wall and resembled the block forms with partitions omitted.
The bottoms of the rear uprights were held by being wedged into the
grooves in the blocks, and the bottoms of the front uprights were held
by bolts resting on top of the blocks. The tops of the uprights were
held together across the wall by tie bolts. The forms being placed, the
mode of procedure was as follows:

The crusher fed directly into a measuring box. After some 6 ins. of
stone had run into the box the door of the crusher spout was closed. A
wheelbarrow load of sand was spread over the stone in the box and over
this were emptied and spread two or three bags of cement. Another layer
of stone and then of sand and of cement were put in and these operations
repeated until the box was full. The box was then hoisted and dumped
into the hopper of a gravity mixer of the trough type which ran along a
track on the scow and fed directly into the forms. The gang worked
consisted of 1 foreman, 1 derrickman and 18 common laborers. This gang
placed from 65 to 75 cu. yds. of concrete per day at a labor cost of 50
cts. per cu. yd.

[Illustration: Fig. 85.--Cross-Section of Concrete Pier, Superior, Wis.]

~CONCRETE BLOCK PIER, SUPERIOR ENTRY, WIS.~--The methods and cost of
constructing a concrete pier 3,023 ft. long and of the cross-section
shown by Fig. 85 at Superior entry, Wisconsin, are given in the
following paragraphs.

_Molds and Molding._--About 80 per cent. of the concrete was deposited
in molds under water, according to a plan devised by Major D. D.
Galliard, corps of engineers. In brief the concrete was built in place
in two tiers of blocks, the lower tier resting directly on piles and
being entirely under water and the upper tier being almost entirely
above water. As shown by Fig. 85, a pile trestle was built on each side
of the proposed pier and a traveler for raising and lowering the molds
spanned the space between trestles.

The molds were bottomless boxes built in four pieces, two sides and two
ends, held together by tie rods. Fig. 86 shows an end and a side of one
of the shallow water molds and Fig. 87 shows in detail the method of
fastening the end to the side. It will be seen that the 1¼-in.
turnbuckle rods pass through the ends of beams that bear against the
outside of the mold. These tie rods have eyes at each end in which rods
with wedge-shaped ends are inserted. The molds were erected on the
trestle by a locomotive crane and were then lifted by the mold traveler,
carried and lowered into place. The largest one of these molds with its
iron ballast, weighed 40 tons. To remove a mold, after the block had
hardened, the nuts on the wedge-ended rods were turned, thus pulling the
wedge end from the eye of the tie rod and releasing the sides of the
mold from the ends. The locomotive crane then raised the ends and sides,
one at a time, and assembled them ready to be lowered again for the next
block. The time required to remove one of these 40-ton molds, reassemble
and set it again rarely exceeded 60 minutes and was sometimes reduced to
45 minutes.

[Illustration: Fig. 86.--Mold for Concrete Block for Pier at Superior,
Wis.]

The concrete was deposited in alternate blocks and the molds described
were for the first blocks; for the intermediate blocks molds of two side
pieces alone were used, the blocks already in place serving in lieu of
end pieces. The two side pieces were bolted together with three tie rods
at each end; the tie rods were encased in a box of 1-in. boards 4×4 ins.
inside which served as a strut to prevent the sides from closing
together and as a means of permitting the tie rods to be removed after
the concrete had set. The mold was knocked down just as was the full
mold described above and the boxes encasing the tie rods were left in
the concrete.

[Illustration: Fig. 87.--Device for Locking End and Side of Mold for
Concrete Blocks for Pier at Superior, Wis.]

An important feature was the device for handling the molds; this, as
before stated, was a traveler, which straddled the pier site, it having
a gage of 31 ft. It carried a four-drum engine, the drums of which were
actuated, either separately or together, by a worm gear so as to operate
positively in lowering as well as in raising. The load was hung from
four hooks, depending by double blocks and 5/8-in. wire rope from four
trolleys suspended from the trusses of the traveler; this arrangement
allowed a lateral adjustment of the mold. The hoisting speed was 6 ft.
per minute and the traveling speed 100 ft. per minute. The locomotive
crane also deserves mention because it was mounted on a gantry high
enough to permit material cars to pass under it on the same trestle,
thus making it practicable to work two cranes.

[Illustration: Fig. 88.--Bucket for Depositing Concrete Under Water for
Pier at Superior, Wis.]

The concrete was received from the mixer into drop bottom buckets of the
form shown by Fig. 88. The buckets were taken to the work four at once
on cars, and there lifted by the locomotive crane and lowered into the
mold where they were dumped by tripping a latch connected by rope to the
crane. To prevent the concrete from washing, the open tops of the
buckets were covered with 3×4 ft. pieces of 12-oz. canvas in which were
quilted 110 pieces of 1/16×1×3-in sheets of lead. Two covers were used
on each bucket and were attached one to each side of the bucket top so
as to fold over the top with a lap. This arrangement was entirely
successful for its purpose.

_Concrete Mixing._--The proportions of the subaqueous concrete were
1-2½-5 by volume, or 1-2.73-5.78 by weight, cement being assumed to
weigh 100 lbs. per cu. ft.; the proportions of the superaqueous concrete
were 1-3.12-6.25 by volume, or 1-3.41-7.22 by weight. The dry sand
weighed 109.2 lbs. per cu. ft., the voids being 35.1 per cent.; the
pebbles weighed 115.5 lbs. per cu. ft., the voids being 31 per cent.

The pebbles for the concrete were delivered by contract and were
unloaded from scows by clam-shell bucket into a hopper. This hopper fed
onto an endless belt conveyor which delivered the pebbles to a rotary
screen. Inside this screen water was discharged under a pressure of 60
lbs. per sq. in. from a 4-in. pipe to wash the pebbles. From the screen
the pebbles passed through a chute into 4-cu. yd cars which were hauled
up an incline to a height of 65 ft. by means of a hoisting engine. The
cars were dumped automatically, forming a stock pile. Under the stock
pile was a double gallery or tunnel provided with eight chutes through
the roof and from these chutes the cars were loaded and hauled by a
hoisting engine up an inclined trestle to the bins above the concrete
mixer. The sand was handled from the stock pile in the same manner. The
cement was loaded in bags on a car in the warehouse, hauled to the mixer
and elevated by a sprocket chain elevator.

Chutes from the bins delivered the materials into the concrete mixer,
which was of the Chicago Improved Cube type, revolving on trunnions
about an axial line through diagonal corners of the cube. The mixer
possessed the advantage of charging and discharging without stopping. It
was driven by a 7×10-in. vertical engine with boiler. The mixer
demonstrated its ability to turn out a batch of perfectly mixed concrete
every 1-1/3 minutes. It discharged into a hopper provided with a cut-off
chute which discharged into the concrete buckets on the cars.

_Labor Force and Costs._--In the operation of the plant 55 men were
employed, 43 being engaged on actual concrete work and 12 building molds
and appliances for future work. The work was done by day labor for the
government and the cost of operation was as follows for one typical
week, when in six days of eight hours each, the output was 1,383 cu.
yds., or an average of 230 cu. yds. per day. The output on one day was
considerably below the average on account of an accident to the plant,
but this may be considered as typical.

Pebbles from Stock Pile to Mixer--                        Per cu. yd.
4 laborers at $2                                              $0.0348
1 engineman at $3                                              0.0131
Coal, oil and waste at $1.03                                   0.0043

Sand from Stock Pile to Mixer--
5 laborers at $2                                              $0.0434
1 engineman at $2.50                                           0.0109
Coal, oil and waste at $0.82                                   0.0035

Cement from Warehouse to Mixer--
5 laborers at $2                                              $0.0434

Mixing Concrete--
1 engineman at $2.50                                          $0.0109
1 mechanic at $2.50                                            0.0108
Coal, oil and waste at $1.29                                   0.0056

Transporting Concrete--
4 laborers at $2                                              $0.0348
1 engineman at $3                                              0.0130
Coal, oil and waste at $0.66                                   0.0028

Depositing Concrete in Molds--
4 laborers at $2                                              $0.0348
1 engineman at $3                                              0.0130
1 rigger at $3                                                 0.0130
Coal, oil and waste at $1.18                                   0.0051

Assembling, Transporting, Setting and Removing Molds--
4 laborers at $2                                              $0.0347
1 engineman at $3.25                                           0.0141
1 carpenter at $3                                              0.0130
1 mechanic at $2.50                                            0.0109
Coal, oil and waste at $1.39                                   0.0060

Care of Tracks--
1 laborer at $2                                               $0.0086
1 mechanic at $2.50                                            0.0109

Supplying Coal--
3 laborers at $2                                              $0.0260

Blacksmith Work--
1 laborer at $2                                               $0.0086
1 blacksmith at $3.25                                          0.0141
1 waterboy at $0.75                                            0.0032
                                                              -------
Total per cubic yard                                          $0.4473
Add 75% of cost of administration                              0.1388
                                                              -------
Total labor per cu. yd.                                       $0.5861

The total cost of each cubic yard of concrete in place was estimated to
be as follows:

                                                          Per cu. yd.
Ten-elevenths cu. yd. pebbles at $1.085                       $0.9864
Ten-twenty seconds cu. yd. sand at $0.00                       0.0000
1 26 bbls. cement at $1.77                                     2.2302
Labor as above given                                           0.5861
Cost of plant distributed over total yardage                   0.8400
                                                              -------
Total                                                         $4.6427

It will be noted that the sand cost nothing as it was dredged from the
trench in which the pier was built, and paid for as dredging. The cost
of the plant is distributed over this south pier and over the proposed
north pier work on the basis of only 20 per cent. salvage value after
the completion of both piers. It is said, however, that 80 per cent. is
too high an allowance for the probable depreciation.

~DAM, RICHMOND, INDIANA.~--The dam shown in cross-section in Fig. 89 was
built at Richmond, Ind. It was 120 ft. long and was built between the
abutments of a dismantled bridge. The concrete was made in the
proportion of 1 bbl. Portland cement to 1 cu. yd. of gravel; old iron
was used for reinforcement. The foundations were put down by means of a
cofferdam which was kept dry by pumping. On completion it was found that
there was a tendency to scour in front of the apron and accordingly
piling was driven and the intervening space rip-rapped with large
stone. Labor was paid as follows per day: Foreman, $3; carpenter, $2.50;
cement finisher, $2; laborers, $1.50. The concrete was mixed by hand and
wheeled to place in wheelbarrows. The cost of the work was as follows:

Materials--                               Per cu. yd.
204 bbls. cement at $1.60                      $1.485
Sand and gravel                                 0.800
Lumber                                          0.610
Tools, hardware, etc.                           0.445
                                               ------
Total materials                                 $3.34

Labor--
Clearing and excavating                         $0.96
Setting forms and mixing concrete                1.01
Pumping                                          0.27
                                                -----
Total labor                                     $2.24
Total materials and labor                       $5.58

[Illustration: Fig. 89.--Concrete Dam at Richmond, Ind.]

~DAM AT ROCK ISLAND ARSENAL, ILLINOIS.~--The dam was in the shape of an L
with one side 192 ft. and the other side 208 ft. long; it consists of a
wall 30½ ft. high, 3½ ft. wide at the top and 6½ ft. wide at the bottom
with a counterfort every 16 ft., 26 in all. Each counterfort extended
back 16 ft. and was 4 ft. thick for a height of 6 ft. and then 3 ft.
thick. There were 3,500 cu. yds. of concrete in the work, which was done
by day labor under the direction of the U. S. Engineer in charge.

The forms consisted of front and back uprights of 8×10-in. stuff 24 ft.
high, connected through the wall by ¾-in. rods which were left in the
concrete. The lagging was 2×12-in. plank dressed down 1¾ ins. placed
inside the uprights. These forms were built full height in 16-ft.
sections with a counterfort coming at the center of each section. Each
section contained 95 cu. yds. of concrete and was filled in a day's
work. The concrete was a 1-4-7 mixture wet enough to quake when rammed.
Run of crusher limestone was used of which 50 per cent. passed a 1-in.
sieve, 17 per cent. a No. 3 sieve and 9 per cent. a No. 8 sieve. The
concrete was mixed in Cockburn Barrow & Machine Co.'s screw-feed mixer
which discharged into 2-in. plank skips 2 ft. wide 5-1/3 ft. long and 14
ins. deep, holding ¼ cu. yd. These skips were taken on cars to a derrick
crane overhanging the forms and by it hoisted and dumped into the forms.
The derrick was moved along a track at the foot of the wall as the work
progressed. The concrete was spread and rammed in 6-in. layers. The men
were paid $1.50 per 8-hour's work and the work cost including footing,
as follows:

Item--                                         Total.     Per cu. yd.
Cement                                      $1,500.00        $0.429
Sand                                           400.00         0.114
Storing and hauling cement                     460.00         0.131
Taking sand from barge to mixer                 96.00         0.027
Crushing stone                               1,450.00         0.414
Mixing concrete                              4,825.00         1.378
Placing concrete                             1,670.00         0.477
Lumber for forms, etc.                         600.00         0.171
Erecting and taking down forms               2,450.00         0.700
                                           ----------        ------
Totals                                     $13,451.00        $3.841

~DAM AT McCALL FERRY, PA.~--The dam was 2,700 ft. long and 48 ft. high of
the cross-section shown by Fig. 90 and with its subsidiary works
required some 350,000 cu. yds. of concrete. The plant for mixing and
placing the concrete was notable chiefly for its size and cost. Parallel
to the dam, which extended straight across the river, and just below its
toe a service bridge consisting of a series of 40-ft. concrete arch
spans was built across the river. This service bridge was 50 ft. wide
and carried four standard gage railway tracks besides a traveling crane
track of 44 ft. gage. This very heavy construction of a temporary
structure was necessitated by the frequency of floods against which only
a solid bridge could stand; it was considered cheaper in the long run to
provide a bridge which would certainly last through the work than to
chance a structure of less cost which would certainly go out with the
floods. The concrete service bridge was designed to be destroyed by
blasting when the dam had been completed. The method of construction was
to build the dam in alternate 40 ft. sections, mixing the concrete on
shore, taking it out along the service bridge in buckets on cars and
handling the buckets from cars to forms by traveling cranes.

[Illustration: Fig. 90.--Steel Forms for McCall Ferry Dam.]

The concrete mixing plant is shown by Fig. 91. Cars loaded with cement,
sand and stone were brought in over the tracks carried on the wall tops
of the bins and were unloaded respectively into bins A, B and C,
of which there were eight sets. Each set supplied material by means of
measuring cars to a 1 cu. yd. Smith mixer. Two sets of cars were used
for each mixer so that one could be loading while the other was
charging. The mixers discharged into 1 cu. yd. buckets set two on a car
and eight cars were hauled to the work in train by an 18-ton "dinky." At
the work the buckets were picked up by the traveling cranes and the
concrete dumped into the forms. Figure 90 shows the construction of the
steel forms. Six sets of forms were used. Each set consisted of five
frames spaced 10 ft. apart and braced together in the planes parallel to
the dam, and each set molded 40 ft. of dam. The lagging consisted of
wooden boxes 8½ ft. wide and 10 ft. long. For the vertical face of the
dam these boxes were attached by bolts to the vertical post, for the
curved face they were bolted to a channel bent to the curve and held by
struts from the inclined post of the steel frame.

[Illustration: Fig. 91.--Concrete Mixing Plant for McCall Ferry Dam.]

In construction the footing and the body of the dam to an elevation of 5
ft. above the beginning of the curve were built continuously across the
river; above this elevation the dam was built in alternate 40-ft.
sections. The strut back to the service bridge shown in the lower right
hand corner of Fig. 90, shows the manner of bracing the first 30-ft.
section of the inclined post to hold the lagging for the continuous
portion. The lagging was added a piece at a time as concreting
progressed. The ends of each set of frames for a 40-ft. section were for
the isolated sections closed by timber bulkheads carrying box forms to
mold grooves into which the concrete of the intermediate sections would
bond.

[Illustration: Fig. 92.--Traveler for Concreting Dam, Chaudiere Falls,
Quebec.]

The concrete used was a 1-3-5 mixture, the stone ranging in size from 2
to 5 ins. Rubble stone from one man size to ½ ton were bedded in the
concrete. The capacity of the concrete plant was 2,000 cu. yds. per day
or about 250 cu. yds. per mixer per 10-hour day.

~DAM, CHAUDIERE FALLS, QUEBEC.~--The dam was 800 ft. long and from 16 to
20 ft. high, constructed of 1-2-4 concrete with rubble stone embedded.
The rubble stones were separated at least 9 ins. horizontally and 12
ins. vertically and were kept 20 ins. from faces. At one point the
rubble amounted to 40 per cent. of the volume, but the average for the
dam was 25 to 30 per cent. The stone was broken at the work, some by
hand, but most by machine, all to pass a 2-in. ring. Hand-broken stone
ran very uniform in size and high in voids, often up to 50 per cent.
Stone broken by crusher with jaws 2 ins. apart would run 20 to 30 per
cent. over 2 ins. in size and give about 45 per cent. voids; with
crusher jaws 1½ ins. apart from 98 to 100 per cent. was under 2 ins. in
size and contained about 42 per cent. of voids. It was found that if the
crushers were kept full all the time the product was much smaller,
particularly with Gates gyratory crusher, though a little more than
rated power was required when the crusher was thus kept full. This
practice secured increased economy in both quantity and quality of
product. The concrete was made and placed by means of a movable traveler
shown by Fig. 92. Concrete materials were supplied to the charging
platform of the traveler by means of a traveling derrick moving on a
parallel track. In placing the concrete on the rock bottom it was found
necessary in order to secure good bond to scrub the rock with water and
brooms and cover it with a bed of 2 ins. of 1-2 mortar. The method of
concreting in freezing weather is described in Chapter VII.




CHAPTER XII.

METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING BRIDGE PIERS AND ABUTMENTS.


The construction of piers and abutments for bridges is best explained by
describing individual examples of such work. So far, in America, bridge
piers have been nearly always of plain concrete and of form and section
differing little from masonry piers; where reinforcement has been used
at all it has consisted of a surface network of bars introduced chiefly
to ensure monolithic action of the pier under lateral stresses. In
Europe cellular piers of reinforced concrete have been much used. Plain
concrete abutments differ little in form and volume from masonry
abutments. Reinforced concrete abutments are usually of L-section with
counterforts bracing the upright slab and bridge seat to the base slab.

Form work for reinforced abutments is somewhat complex; that for plain
abutments and piers is of simple character, the only variations from
plain stud and sheathing construction being in the forms for moldings
and coping and for cut-waters. For piers of moderate height the form is
commonly framed complete for the whole pier, but for high piers it is
built up as the work progresses by removing the bottom boards and
placing them at the top. Opposite forms are held together by wire ties
through the concrete. Movable panel forms have been successfully
employed, but they rarely cheapen the cost much. Sectional forms, which
can be shifted from pier to pier where a number of piers of identical
size are to be built, may frequently be used to advantage. An example of
such use is given in this chapter.

Derricks are the recognized appliances for hoisting and placing the
concrete in pier work; they are the only practicable appliance where the
pier is high and particularly where it stands in water and mixing barges
are employed. For abutment work and land piers of moderate height
derricks and wheelbarrow or cart inclines are both available and where
much shifting of the derricks is involved the apparently more crude
method compares favorably in cost.

The methods of placing concrete under water for pier foundations are
described in Chapter V, and the use of rubble concrete for pier
construction is illustrated by several examples in Chapter VI. The
following examples of pier and abutment construction cover both large
and small work and give a clear idea of current practice.

[Illustration: Fig. 93.--Pier and Cofferdam for a Railway Bridge.]

~COST OF CONSTRUCTING RECTANGULAR PIER FOR A RAILWAY BRIDGE.~--This pier,
Fig. 93, was built in water averaging 5 ft. deep. The cofferdam
consisted of triple-lap sheet piling, of the Wakefield pattern, the
planks being 2 ins. thick, and spiked together so as to give a cofferdam
wall 6 ins thick. The cofferdam enclosed an area 14×20 ft., giving a
clearance of 1 ft. all around the base of the concrete pier, and a
clearance of 2 ft. between the cofferdam and the outer edge of the
nearest pile. The cofferdam sheet piles were 18 ft. long, driven 11 ft.
deep into sand, and projecting 2 ft. above the surface of the water.

The concrete base resting on the foundation piles was 12×18 ft. The
concrete pier resting on this base was 7×13 ft. at the bottom, and 5×11
ft. at the top. The pier supported deck plate girders. There were 100
cu. yds. of concrete in the pier and base.

The cost of this pier, which is typical of a large class of concrete
pier work, has been obtained in such detail that we analyze it in
detail, giving the costs of cofferdam construction and excavation as
well as of mixing and placing the concrete.

Setting up and taking down derrick and platform:

4 days foreman at $5.00                                       $ 20.00
¾ days engineman at $3.00                                        2.25
¾ days blacksmith at $3.00                                       2.25
¾ days blacksmith helper at $2.00                                1.50
22 days laborers at $2.00                                       44.00
                                                              -------
Total                                                         $ 70.00

Cofferdam--
7 days foreman at $5.00                                       $ 35.00
4 days engineman at $3.00                                       12.00
38 days laborers at $2.00                                       76.00
1 ton coal at $3.00                                              3.00
                                                              -------
Total labor on 7,900 ft. B. M. at $16.00                      $126.00
7,900 ft. B. M. at $20.00                                      158.00
                                                              -------
Total for 58 cu. yds. excavation                              $284.00

Wet Excavation--
1.8 days foreman at $5.00                                      $ 9.00
1.5 days engineman at $3.00                                      4.50
9 days laborers at $2.00                                        18.00
½ ton coal at $3.00                                              1.50
                                                              -------
Total labor on 58 cu. yds. at 57c.                            $ 33.00

Foundation Piles--
960 lin. ft. at 10c                                           $ 96.00
4 days setting up driver and driving 24 piles at $20 per
day for labor and fuel                                          80.00
                                                              -------
Total                                                         $176.00

Concrete--
100 cu yds. stone at $1.00                                    $100.00
40 cu. yds. sand at $0.50                                       20.00
100 bbls. cement at $2.00                                      200.00
5 days foreman at $5.00                                         25.00
50 days laborers at $2.00                                      100.00
5 days engineman at $3.00                                       15.00
2 tons coal at $3.00                                             6.00
                                                              -------
Total, 100 cu. yds. at $4.66                                  $466.00

8 days carpenters at $3.00                                      24.00
2,400 ft. B. M. 2-in. plank at $25.00                           60.00
1,000 ft. B. M. 4×6-in. studs at $20.00                         20.00
Nails, wire, etc                                                 2.00
                                                              -------
Total forms for 100 cu. yds. at $1.06                         $106.00

Summary--
Setting up derrick, etc.                                      $ 70.00
Cofferdam (7,900 ft. B. M.)                                    284.00
Wet excavation (58 cu. yds.)                                    33.00
Foundation piles (24)                                          176.00
Concrete (100 cu. yds.)                                        466.00
Forms (3,400 ft. B. M.)                                        106.00
                                                            ---------
Total                                                       $1,135.00
Transporting plant                                              20.00
20 days rental of plant at $5.00                               100.00
                                                            ---------
Total cost of pier                                          $1,252.00

Regarding the item of plant rental, it should be said that the plant
consisted of a pile driver, a derrick, a hoisting engine, and sundry
timbers for platforms. There was no concrete mixer. Hence an allowance
$5 per day for use of plant is sufficient.

It will be noted that no salvage has been allowed on the lumber for
forms. As a matter of fact, all this lumber was recovered, and was used
again in similar work.

Referring to the cost of cofferdam work, we see that, in order to
excavate the 58 cu. yds. inside the cofferdam, it was necessary to spend
$284, or nearly $5 per cu. yd. before the actual excavation was begun.
The work of excavating cost only 57 cts. per cu. yd., but this does not
include the cost of erecting the derrick which was used in raising the
loaded buckets of earth, as well as in subsequently placing the
concrete. The sheet piles were not pulled, in this instance, but a
contractor who understands the art of pile pulling would certainly not
leave the piles in the ground. A hand pump served to keep the cofferdam
dry enough for excavating; but in more open material a power pump is
usually required.

The above costs are the actual costs, and do not include the
contractor's profits. His bid on the work was as follows:

Piles delivered               12 cts. per ft.
Piles driven                         $5 each
Cofferdam                          $37 per M.
Wet excavation              $1.00 per cu. yd.
Concrete                    $8.00 per cu. yd.

In order to ascertain whether or not these prices yielded a fair profit,
it is necessary to distribute the cost of the plant transportation and
rental over the various items. We have allowed $120 for plant
transportation and rental, and $70 for setting up and taking down the
plant, or $190 in all. The working time of the plant was as follows:

                                   Per cent.    Prorated
                         Days.     of time.     plant cost.
Cofferdam                 7           39           $74
Excavation                2           11            21
Foundation piles          4           22            42
Concrete                  5           28            53
                         --          ---          ----
Totals                   18          100          $190

As above given, the labor on the 7,900 ft. B. M. in the cofferdam cost
$126, or $16 per M.; but this additional $74 of prorated plant costs,
adds another $9 per M., bringing the total labor and plant to $25 per
M., to which must be added the $20 per M. paid for the timber in the
cofferdam, making a grand total of $45 per M. This shows that the
contractor's bid of $37 per M. was much too low.

The labor on the excavation cost 57 cts. per cu. yd., to which must be
added the prorated plant cost of $21 distributed over the 58 cu. yds.,
or 36 cts. per cu. yd., making a total of 93 cts. per cu. yd. This shows
that the bid of $1 per cu. yd. was hardly high enough.

The labor on the 24 foundation piles cost $80, or $3.33 each. The
prorated plant cost is $42, or $1.75 per pile, which, added to $3.33,
makes a total of $5.08. This shows that the bid of $5 Per pile for
driving was too low. However there was a profit of 2 cts. per ft., or 80
cts. per pile, on the cost of piles delivered.

The concrete amounted to 100 cu. yds. Hence the prorated plant cost of
$53 is equivalent to 53 cts. per cu. yd. Hence the total cost of the
concrete was:

                                 Per cu. yd.
Cement, sand and stone             $3.20
Foreman (at $5)                     0.25
Labor (at $2)                       1.00
Engineman (at $3)                   0.15
Coal (at $3)                        0.06
Carpenters (at $3)                  0.24
Forms (at $23.50, used once)        0.80
Wire, nails, etc                    0.02
Prorated plant cost                 0.53
                                   -----
Total                              $6.25

Since the contract price for concrete was $8 per cu. yd., there was a
good profit in this item.

~BACKING FOR BRIDGE PIERS AND ABUTMENTS.~--Six piers and two abutments of
the City Island bridge were constructed in 1906 at New York city, of
masonry backed with 1-2-4 concrete below and 1-3-5 concrete above high
water. The piers and abutments were all sunk to rock or hard material by
means of timber cofferdams. Table XVI gives the labor cost of mixing and
placing the concrete backing for one abutment and three piers, after the
materials were delivered on the scows. The concrete was mixed by a
rectangular horizontal machine mixer and deposited by 2-cu. yd. bottom
dump buckets handled by derrick scows and stiff leg derricks. The high
cost of concreting on Pier 2 was due to the fact that the concrete was
improperly deposited and had to be removed and the higher cost in
Abutment 1 was probably due to the fact that the abutment was so long
and narrow that it was difficult to handle the bucket.


TABLE XVI.--COST OF CONCRETE BACKING FOR MASONRY PIERS.

[Transcriber's note: Table split to be less than 80 column width]

                         Abutment No. 1.             Pier No. 2.
                Wages                Cost                 Cost
                 per   No.   Total    per       No.   Total    per
                Hour.  hrs.  Cost.  cu. yd.     hrs.  Cost.  cu. yd.
Superintendent   70     24  $16.80  $0.03        47  $32.90  $0.09
Foreman          35    160   56.00   0.09       128   44.80   0.13
Laborers      15-20   2555  383.25   0.65      2038  313.60   0.92
Engineman        30    365  109.50   0.19       196   58.50   0.19
Timekeeper       40     86   34.40   0.06        46   18.40   0.06


                          Pier No. 3.                Pier No. 4.
               Wages             Cost                     Cost
                per  No.  Total   per            No.  Total   per
               Hour. hrs. Cost. cu. yd.          hrs  Cost. cu. yd.

Superintendent  70    72 $50.40  $0.05            16 $11.20 $0.03
Foreman         35   324 113.40   0.12            54  18.90  0.06
Laborers     15-20  3513 526.95   0.56           940 141.00  0.44
Engineman       30   244  73.20   0.08            60  18.00  0.06
Timekeeper      40    81  32.40   0.04            10   4.00  0.01

                             Summary.
               Wages    Total      Total        Av.
                         Hrs.      cost.    per cu. yd.
Superintendent  70       159      $111.30     $0.05
Foreman         35       666       233.10      0.11
Laborers     15-20      9046      1364.90      0.62
Engineman       30       865       259.50      0.12
Timekeeper      40       223        89.20      0.04

~PNEUMATIC CAISSONS, WILLIAMSBURG BRIDGE.~--Mr. Francis L. Pruyn, Assoc.
M. Am. Soc. C. E., gives the following costs of concreting the pneumatic
caissons for the Brooklyn tower of the Williamsburg bridge at New York
city. The work comprised the mixing and placing of some 13,637 cu. yds.
of concrete in two caissons. Table XVII shows the itemized costs for one
caisson and Table XVIII shows them for the other caisson. The methods of
work were as follows:

After each caisson was built it was towed to its proper site, where it
was held in place by temporary pile dock built completely around it. On
these docks the concrete was placed; a 2 cu. yd. cubical mixer of the
usual pattern being used for mixing. The concrete materials, consisting
of sand, stone and cement was handled direct from barges alongside, into
the mixer. The concrete was placed by a derrick located in the center of
the caisson, which was a bad feature as the caisson was usually out of
level and considerable difficulty was experienced in swinging the
derrick. On the South caisson ¾ cu. yd. bottom dump buckets were used in
placing the concrete, on the North caisson the size of these was
increased to 1½ cu. yd. which reduced the cost of placing 15 cts. per
cu. yd. There were placed in the South caisson 3,827 cu. yds. in 32 days
of actual working time--120 cu. yds. per day of 10 hrs. The gross time
was 2 months. On the North caisson 5,693 cu. yds. were placed in 46 days
worked--124 cu. yds. per day. The gross time was 4 months.

The rates of labor were as follows per 10-hour day:

Foreman                   $5.00
Assistant foreman          2.50
Hoisters                   2.50
Fireman                    1.60
Laborer                    1.50

Proportions concrete were 1: 2.5: 6.

The low price of sand in the North caisson was brought about by the
finding of good building sand in the excavation for the anchorage, which
work was done by the same contractor.

When the caissons had been sealed the iron material shafts were removed.
This left holes 5 ft.×6 ft. extending from the roof of the caisson up
to Mean H.W. which were filled with concrete. These shaft holes were 80
ft. deep on the South caisson and 100 ft. deep on the North caisson.
They were partially filled with water and the concrete had to be placed
with considerable care. Wooden chutes were used on the South caisson;
they rested on the caisson roof, were filled with concrete and then
raised allowing concrete to flow out at the bottom. The shaft holes were
too deep on the North caisson for chutes and 20 cu. ft. bottom dump
buckets were used. They had to be lowered to bottom of shaft each trip
before dumping, a slow operation, which greatly added to the cost.
Proportion for concrete 1-2.5-6.

The proportion for concrete in working chamber was the same as for all
other concrete. The specifications called for 6 in. of mortar, of 1 part
of cement to 2½ parts of sand, between the concrete and all bearing
areas; that is, under the cutting edge and directly under the roof of
the working chamber. The concrete was mixed in the cubical mixer and
dumped on the bottom door of the material lock, the top door of the lock
was then closed, the bottom door opened and the concrete fell through
the shaft to the working chamber. It was then shoveled by the sand hogs
into place. A 6-in. space was left below all bearing surfaces into which
damp mortar was tightly rammed. Concreting the South caisson took 10¼
working days of 24 hours, the gangs working night and day in twelve
2-hour shifts; 1,566 cu. yds. of concrete and mortar were placed, or at
the rate of 140 cu. yds. per 24 hours. The gross time including Sundays
was 14½ days. The sand hogs worked in shifts of 2 hours each and
received $3.50 for the two hours work. The twelve foremen received 1
dollar more: the average gang consisted of 12 sand hogs.

On the North caisson the organization was much better, owing to the
experience gained on the first caisson; and in spite of the fact that
the sand hogs, on account of the increased depth, received $4.00 for 1½
hours' work, or an increase of $22.00 per man per 24 hrs. over that on
the South caisson, the work was done for less money. There were placed
1,566 cu. yds. of concrete in 7 working days of 24 hrs., or at the rate
of 224 cu. yds. per day. The gross time was 11½ days including Sundays.
The average number of men in the sand hog gangs was 18, with one
foreman, who received $5 for 1½ hours work.

TABLE XVII.--ITEMIZED COST OF CONCRETING SOUTH CAISSON FOR BROOKLYN
TOWER OF THE WILLIAMSBURG BRIDGE: COST OF CONCRETING CAISSONS ABOVE
ROOF.

                    South Caisson (3,827 cu. yds.).
    Materials.                     Quantity.        Rate.       Amount.
Cement                           4,480 bbls.        $1.57     $7,034.00
Sand                             1,288 cu. yds.       .60        773.00
Broken stone                     3,421 cu. yds.      1.50      5,132.00
Water                                                             36.00
                                 -------            ------    ---------
    Total                        3,827 cu. yds.     $3.39    $12,975.00

    Labor.
Mixing and placing               3,827 cu. yds.     $0.90     $3,432.00
Plant charges                                                  2,280.00
Plant labor                                                      742.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total plant                  3,827 cu. yds.     $0.79     $3,022.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total cost                   3,827 cu. yds.     $5.08    $19,429.00
General expenses, 10%            3,827 cu. yds.       .51      1,943.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Grand total                  3,827 cu. yds.     $5.59    $21,372.00

                  COST OF CONCRETING SHAFTS.
                                            South Caisson.
    Materials.                     Quantity.        Rate.       Amount.
Concrete                          612½ bbls.        $1.57       $962.00
Sand                              193  cu. yds.       .40         77.00
Stone                             493  cu. yds.      1.10        542.00
                                 -------          ------      ---------
    Total                         541  cu. yds.     $2.92     $1,581.00
    Labor.
Handling, mixing and placing      541  cu. yds.     $0.96       $519.00
Plant charges, etc.               541  cu. yds.      1.06        576.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total                         541  cu. yds.     $4.94     $2,676.00
General expenses, 10%             541  cu. yds.       .49        267.00
                                 -------          ------      ---------
   Grand total                    541  cu. yds.     $5.43     $2,943.00

              COST OF CONCRETE IN WORKING CHAMBERS.
                                   South Caisson. (1,435 cu. yds.)
    Materials.                     Quantity.        Rate.       Amount.
Cement for concrete              1,666 bbls.        $1.57     $2,615.00
Cement for mortar                  459 bbls.         1.57        720.00
Sand for both                      670 cu. yds.       .40        268.00
Broken stone                     1,181 cu. yds.      1.10      1,299.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total materials              1,435 cu. yds.     $3.42     $4,902.00
    Labor.
Top labor, mixing and placing    1,435 cu. yds.     $1.09     $1,575.00
Pneumatic labor                  1,435 cu. yds.      4.93      7,117.00
Compressor house labor           1,435 cu. yds.       .19        275.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total labor                  1,435 cu. yds.     $6.21     $8,967.00

    Plant.
Coal at $2.40 per ton            1,435 cu. yds.       .10        140.00
Concrete plant                   1,435 cu. yds.       .79      1,145.00
Pneumatic plant                  1.435 cu. yds.      1.05      1,522.00
                                --------           ------      ---------
    Total plant                  1,435 cu. yds.     $1.94     $2,807.00
    Totals                       1,435 cu. yds.    $11.57    $16,676.00
General expenses, 10%            1,435 cu. yds.      1.16      1,667.00
                                --------          -------    ----------
    Grand total                  1,435 cu. yds.    $12.73    $18,343.00


TABLE XVIII.--ITEMIZED COST OF CONCRETING NORTH CAISSON FOR BROOKLYN
TOWER OF THE WILLIAMSBURG BRIDGE:

   COST OF CONCRETING CAISSON ABOVE ROOF (5,692 cu. yds.)

    Materials.                     Quantity.        Rate.       Amount.
Cement                           6,707½ bbls.      $1.57     $10,531.00
Sand                             2,133  cu. yds.     .40         845.00
Broken stone                     4,938  cu. yds.    1.10       5,432.00
Water                                                             51.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total                        5,692  cu. yds.    $2.96    $16,859.00
    Labor.
Mixing and placing               5,692  cu. yds.    $0.73     $4,159.00
Plant charges                                                  2,952.00
Plant labor                                                      517.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total                        5,692  cu. yds.    $0.61     $3,469.00
    Total cost                   5,692  cu. yds.    $4.30    $24,487.00
General expenses, 10%            5,692  cu. yds.      .43      2,448.00
    Grand total                  5,692  cu. yds.    $4.73    $26,935.00

                                        COST OF CONCRETING SHAFTS.

    Materials.                     Quantity.        Rate.       Amount.
Cement                           614½ bbls.         $1.57       $965.00
Sand                             204  cu. yds.        .40         82.00
Stone                            521  cu. yds.       1.10        574.00
                                 -------            ------    ---------
    Total                        576  cu. yds.      $2.82     $1,621.00
    Labor.
Mixing and placing               576  cu. yds.       1.70        982.00
Plant charges, etc.              576  cu. yds.       1.36        795.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total                        576  cu. yds.      $5.88     $3,398.00
General expenses, 10%            576  cu. yds.        .59        339.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Grand total                  576  cu. yds.      $6.47     $3,737.00

       COST OF CONCRETING WORKING CHAMBERS (1,566 cu. yds.).

    Materials.                     Quantity.        Rate.       Amount.
Cement for concrete              1,559  bbls.       $1.51     $2,446.00
Cement for mortar                  442  bbls.        1.51       $694.00
Sand for both                      630  cu. yds.      .40        252.00
Broken stone                     1,380  cu. yds.     1.10      1,518.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total                        1.566  cu. yds.    $3.14     $4,910.00
    Labor.
Top labor, mixing and placing    1,566  cu. yds.    $0.78     $1,198.00
Pneumatic labor                  1,566  cu. yds.     4.91      7,694.00
Compressor house labor           1,566  cu. yds.      .11        180.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total labor                  1,566  cu. yds.    $5.80     $9,072.00

    Plant.
Coal at $2.40 per ton            1,566  cu. yds.      .06         87.00
Concrete plant                   1,566  cu. yds.      .86      1,352.00
Pneumatic plant                  1,566  cu. yds.      .81      1,272.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Total plant                  1,566  cu. yds.    $1.73     $2,711.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Totals                       1,566  cu. yds.   $10.67    $16,693.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
General expenses, 10%            1,566  cu. yds.     1.06      1,669.00
                                 -------           ------     ---------
    Grand total                  1,566  cu. yds.   $11.73    $18,362.00

~COST OF FILLING PIER CYLINDERS.~--The following costs were obtained in
mixing and placing concrete in steel cylinder piers. The sand and gravel
were wheeled 100 ft. to the mixing board at the foot of the cylinder,
mixed and shoveled into wooden skips, hoisted 20 ft. by horsepower and
dumped into the cylinder. The foreman worked on the mixing board and the
men worked with great energy. The costs were as follows:

  Item--                                      Per day.    Per cu. yd.
6 men wheeling materials and mixing at 15
  cts. per hour                                 9.00         $0.45
2 men dumping skips and ramming at 15 cts.
  per hour                                      3.00          0.15
1 team and driver at 40 cts. per hour           4.00          0.20
1 foreman at 30 cts. per hour                   3.00          0.15
                                               -----          ----
    Totals                                    $19.00         $0.95

~PIERS, CALF KILLER RIVER BRIDGE.~--The following methods and costs of
building two new piers and extending three old piers with concrete are
given by Mr. J. Guy Huff. The work was done by the railway company's
masonry gangs. Figure 94 shows the arrangement of the several piers and
the character of the work on each and Fig. 95 gives the detail
dimensions of the three main piers.

The sand and aggregate, consisting of blast furnace slag, were unloaded
from cars to platforms on a level with the top of rail, placed about 100
ft. south from the south end of the bridge. A cubical 1/6 cu. yd. mixer
was used. This was operated by a gasoline engine, and was located on a
platform about 50 ft. south of the south end pier. A tank near the mixer
to supply water was elevated enough to get the desired head, and was
kept filled by a pump run by another gasoline engine located down by the
river bank. The cement house was located between the mixer platform and
slag pile.

[Illustration: Fig. 94.--Diagram Arrangement of Piers, Calf Killer River
Bridge.]

[Illustration: Fig. 95.--Details of Pier for Calf Killer Elver Bridge.]

Slag and sand were delivered to the mixer by means of wheelbarrows. The
mixer was so placed that it would dump onto a platform, and the concrete
could then be shoveled into a specially designed narrow-gage car. This
car ran on one rail of the main track and an extra rail outside. A
turnout for clearing passing trains was provided at both ends of the
bridge. The track over the bridge from the mixer had a descending grade
of about 1 per cent., so that with a little start the concrete car would
roll alone down to the required points on the bridge. Only in returning
the empty cars to the mixer was it necessary to push them by hand, and
then only for a distance of never more than 400 ft.

Over the piers on the bridge in the center of the concrete car track
openings were sawed to let the concrete pass to the forms below. To get
the concrete into the forms, there were used zig-zag chutes with arms
about 10 ft. long, which sections were removed as the concrete in the
forms was increased. These chutes were a convenience by their ends
alternating from one side to the other as the arms were removed in
coming up.

The cost of the concrete work was as follows:

                 Unloading Material.
                       Rate    Total days      Per cu. yd.
                    per day.   worked. Total.   concrete.
Foreman             $3.40         5    $17.00   $0.04
11 laborers          1.36-8/10   52    71.14      .15
                                                -----
   Total for unloading material                 $0.19
                 Building Forms, Bins, Etc.
Foreman              $3.40     18         $61.20   $0.14
9 carpenters          2.25    166         373.50     .81
New lumber, 23.7 M. ft.
  at $17.80                               421.86     .92
Old lumber, 6 M. ft. at
  $8.33                                    49.98     .11
                                                   -----
    Total for building forms, bins, etc.           $1.98

              Cofferdam Excavation (45 cu. yds.)
Foreman                 $3.40        8    $27.20   $0.06
9 laborers               1.15 6/10  74½    86.12     .19
                                                   -----
       Total for cofferdam excavation              $0.25
               Cofferdam Concrete (37 cu. yds.)
Foreman                 $3.40        8    $27.20   $0.06
11 laborers              1.36 3/10  79    107.68     .23
Cofferdam lumber, 2.25
  M. ft. at $20.00                         45.00     .09
                                                    ----
      Total for cofferdam concrete                 $0.38
                Concrete Mixing and Placing.
Foreman                 $3.40       30   $102.00   $0.22
9 laborers               1.15 6/10 282    325.99     .71
Cement, 452 bbls. at
  $1.55                                   701.00    1.52
Slag, 437 cu. yds. at $0.20                87.40     .19
Sand, 220 cu. yds. at
  $0.30                                    66.00     .14
                                                   -----
       Total for mixing and placing                $2.78
           Taking Down Forms and Clearing Up.
Foreman                 $3.40       13    $44.20   $0.09
11 laborers              1.17     1.43    107.31     .36
                                                   -----
       Total for taking down forms, etc. $200.00   $0.45
Engineering and supervision                          .43
                                                   -----
       Grand total, 460 cu. yds. concrete          $6.46

The wages given are the average wages. The men worked a 10-hour day. The
concrete was a 1-3-6 mixture. The cofferdam work was done in connection
with the construction of the fourth pier, this pier being the only one
coming in the bed of the river to be built entirely new. The work on
this was started in water about 6 ft. deep. The 37 cu. yds. of concrete
is included in the total of 460 cu. yds. in the above tabulation. By
itself the cost of the cofferdam work, not including cost of cement,
sand and slag was as follows:

                                             Per cu. yd.
                                    Total.     Concrete.
Lumber                            $ 45.00       $1.21
Labor, excavating                  113.32        3.06
Labor, concrete                    134.88        3.64
                                                -----
     Total 37 cu. yds. concrete                 $7.91

[Illustration: Fig. 96.--Details of Piers for K. C., M. & O. Ry.
Bridge.]

~METHOD AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING 21 BRIDGE PIERS.~--The following account
of the methods and cost of constructing 21 concrete piers for a railway
bridge consisting of 20 50-ft. plate girder spans has been compiled from
records kept by Mr. W. W. Colpitts, Assistant Chief Engineer, Kansas
City, Mexico & Orient Ry. The shape and dimensions of the piers are
shown by Fig. 96 and Fig. 97 shows the construction of the forms. Sheet
pile cofferdams to solid rock were used for constructing the
foundations.

[Illustration: Fig. 97.--Forms for Piers for K. C., M. & O. Ry. Bridge.]

The 1-3-5 concrete was mixed in a Smith mixer having a batch capacity of
9 cu. ft. The mixer was located on the slope of the embankment
approach, with the main track at its rear and facing a temporary
material track. This temporary track turned out from the main track
about 500 ft. beyond the mixer and extended diagonally down the
embankment approach on a 3 per cent. grade and across the river bottom
alongside the pier sites. The portion of the track in the river bottom
was supported on bents of spliced ties, jetted to the rock, and wired to
the cofferdam to avoid the danger of loss in case of high water. The
sand and crushed rock were delivered by cars from the main line track,
immediately above the mixer, and the cement was stored in a shanty at
one side of the mixer. The concrete materials and machinery were, in
this manner, very conveniently located for rapid work and well above the
high water line. The concrete was transported to the pier sites in
improvised dump boxes, set on push cars. These dump boxes were hinged
longitudinally and discharged directly into the cofferdams. The grade of
the temporary track carried the push cars by gravity to the cofferdams
and they were returned by teams, for which purpose a straw and brush
road had been built paralleling the track. As the work progressed
farther into the stream, more cars were added properly to balance the
work. While the concrete in the base was still fresh, a number of steel
reinforcing bars, 8 ft. in length, were set in place along each end to
insure a good bond between the base and shaft.

In general, the work of putting in the bases was organized so that about
the same time was required in filling a cofferdam with concrete, in
excavating the sand from the next, and in driving the sheet piling for
the third. These three operations were thus carried on simultaneously
and, although interruptions in one part of the work or the other
occurred frequently, the gangs were interchangeable and no appreciable
loss was suffered, except in time, because of such delays.

In piers 19 and 20, where the rock was from 17 to 19 ft. below the
surface, some difficulty was encountered due to the presence of fissures
in the rock, from which it was necessary to remove the sand to fill with
concrete. In such cases, the larger leaks were stopped as much as
possible by driving sheet piles against the outside face of the
cofferdam and into the fissures, and the smaller leaks by manure in
canvas bags rammed into the openings.

Upon the completion of all the bases, the forms for several shafts were
set in position and the work of filling with concrete proceeded as in
the case of the bases, except that a derrick erected on a flat car and
stationed at the pier was utilized to raise the dump boxes in depositing
the concrete in the forms. As soon as the concrete in one shaft had set
sufficiently to permit of it, the forms were removed and placed on the
pier ahead. Four sets of forms were used for the shafts.

The following are the average prices paid for materials and labor:

Materials.--Lumber for forms, etc., $16.50 per M. ft., B. M.; cement,
Kansas Portland, $1.50 per bbl.; broken limestone, 45c per cu. yd.;
sand, Arkansas River, 15c per ton.

Labor.--General foreman, $110 per month; assistant foreman, $75 per
month; timekeeper, $60 per month; riveters, 35c per hour; blacksmith,
30c per hour; blacksmith assistant, 20c per hour; carpenters, 22½c and
25c per hour; enginemen, 25c per hour; firemen, 20c per hour; night
watchman, 20c per hour; laborers, 17½c and 20c per hour; team (including
driver), 40c per hour. The prices quoted for lumber, cement, limestone
and sand are prices f. o. b., Louisiana, Iola, Kan., El Dorado, Kan.,
and Wichita, Kan.

The total and unit cost of constructing the concrete piers and abutments
and of erecting the steel superstructure are given in the following
tabulation. Altogether there was about 2,300 cu. yds. of concrete in the
substructure, most of which, as stated above, was a 1-3-5 mixture.

  Machinery and Supplies.
Concrete mixer, 20% of cost                          $ 152.10
Supplies, freight, hauling, setting up                 505.04
                                                     --------
      Total                                          $ 657.14
Centrifugal sand pump, 20% of cost                   $  27.00
Supplies, freight, hauling, setting up                 277.50
Rent of traction engine to operate                      83.25
                                                     --------
      Total                                          $ 387.75
Water pump and pipe, 20% of cost                     $  29.00
Supplies, freight, hauling, setting up                 177.32
                                                     --------
      Total                                          $ 206.32
Pile driver engine, 20% of cost                      $ 100.00
Supplies, freight, hauling, setting up                 243.65
                                                     --------
      Total                                          $ 343.65
                                                     --------
      Grand total                                   $1,594.86
  Cofferdams.
Materials, lumber and nails                         $1,285.26
Freight and train haul                                 306.33
Labor making piles                                     696.82
Labor driving piles                                  1,384.05
                                                    ---------
      Total                                         $3,672.46

The sheet piling took 63,500 ft. B. M. of lumber; the cost per 1,000 ft.
B. M. for the sheet piling was then:

Materials, lumber and nails                         $  20.08
Freight and haulage                                     4.82
Labor making piles                                     10.97
Labor driving piles                                    21.80
                                                    --------
Total                                               $  57.67

  Forms, Platforms and Runways.
Lumber, hardware, etc.                             $  224.59
Freight and train haul.                                40.20
Labor making, removing and placing.                   556.51
                                                   ---------
     Total                                         $  821.30
  Concrete Materials.
Cement, freight, unloading and storing.            $4,617.48
Sand, freight, unloading, etc.                      1,336.05
Broken stone, freight, unloading, etc.              2,026.92
                                                   ---------
     Total                                         $7,980.45

This gives us for 2,300 cu. yds. of concrete a cost of $3.47 per cu. yd.
for materials, including freight, storage, and unloading charges of all
kinds. A line on the proportion of the cost contributed by these latter
items may be got by taking the prices of the materials f. o. b. at the
places of production and assuming the proportions for a 1-3-5 concrete.
According to tables in Chapter II, a 1-3-5 broken stone concrete
requires per cubic yard 1.13 bbls. cement, 0.48 cu. yd. sand and 0.80
cu. yd. broken stone. We have then:

1.13 bbls. cement, at $1.50       $1.69
0.48 cu. yd. sand, at 20c           .10
0.80 cu. yd. stone, at 45c          .36
                                  -----
      Total                       $2.15

This leaves a charge of $1.32 per cubic yard of concrete for freight and
handling materials. The cost of mixing concrete and placing it in the
forms was $3,490.87, or $1.52 per cu. yd. We have then:

Cost of concrete materials per cu. yd.       $3.47
Cost of mixing and placing concrete.          1.52
                                             -----
      Total.                                 $4.99

The miscellaneous expenses of the work comprised:

Watchman, tools, telephone, etc.            $  722.48
Shanties, furnishings, supplies, etc.          829.04
                                            ---------
      Total.                                $1,551.52

To this has to be added $1,134.28, the cost of excavating the
cofferdams. The total and unit costs of the different items of the
concrete substructure work can now be summarized as follows:

  Item.                           Total.     Per cu. yd.
Machinery and supplies           1,594.86       $ .69
Cofferdams                       3,672.49        1.60
Forms, etc                         821.30         .36
Concrete materials               7,980.45        3.47
Mixing and placing concrete      3,490.87        1.53
Excavating cofferdams            1,134.28         .49
Miscellaneous                    1,551.52         .67
                               ----------       -----
       Total                   $20,245.74       $8.81

~COST OF PERMANENT WAY STRUCTURES KANSAS CITY OUTER BELT & ELECTRIC
RY.~--The following cost of concrete work including retaining walls,
abutments and box culverts, for the permanent way of the Kansas City
Outer Belt & Electric Ry., is given by Mr. W. W. Colpitts. These figures
are of particular interest, for the variation in prices of materials
during the two-year period while work was in progress and as giving the
average cost of the work on the whole line as well as for individual
structures. The culverts were all box culverts with wing walls and the
abutments were for girder bridges. Walls and abutments were of L section
with triangular or trapezoidal counterforts at the back between base
slab and coping. The form work was thus rather complex.

All work was reinforced concrete, and was done by contract under the
following conditions: The work of preparing foundations, including
excavation, pile driving, diversions of streams, etc., was done by the
railroad company, which also bore one-half the cost of keeping
foundations dry while forms were being built and concrete placed. The
railroad company also furnished the reinforcing bars at the site of each
opening. The concrete work was let at $9 per cu. yd., which figure
covered all the labor and materials necessary to complete the work,
other than the exceptions mentioned. The concrete proportions were
1-3-5. The cement used was Iola Portland and Atlas Portland. The sand
was obtained from the bed of the Kansas River in Kansas City. The rock
used was crushed limestone, passing a 2-in. ring and freed from dust by
screening. Corrugated reinforcing bars, having an elastic limit of from
50,000 to 60,000 lbs. per sq. in., manufactured by the Expanded Metal &
Corrugated Bar Co. of St. Louis, Mo., were used exclusively. The
concrete in the smaller structures was mixed by hand, in the larger by a
No. 1 Smith mixer. In the first structures built 2-in. form lumber was
used, with 2 by 6-in. studs placed 3 ft. on centers. This was abandoned
later for 1-in. lumber with 2 by 6-in. studs, 12 ins. on centers, and
was found to be more satisfactory in producing a better face. The
structures were built in the period from April, 1905, to May, 1907.

The cost of materials and the wages paid labor were as follows:

  Cement--
Per barrel at structure, April, 1905              $1.25
Per barrel at structure, April, 1907               1.92
Average cost per barrel at mill                    1.42
Freight per barrel                                 0.21
Hauling 1½ miles and storage                       0.12
Average cost at structure                          1.75
Average cost per cu. yd. concrete (1.1 bbls.)      1.93
  Sand--
Per cu. yd. at structure, April, 1905             $0.625
Per cu. yd. at structure, April, 1907              0.75
Average cost per cu. yd., river bank               0.30
Freight per cu. yd                                 0.22
Hauling 1½ miles                                   0.20
Average cost at structure                          0.72
Average cost per cu. yd. concrete (½ cu. yd.)      0.36
  Stone--
Per cu. yd. at structure, April, 1905            $1.10
Per cu. yd. at structure, April, 1907             1.75
Average cost per cu. yd. at crusher               0.65
Hauling 4 miles                                   0.84
Average cost at structure                         1.49
Average cost per cu. yd. concrete (0.9 cu. yd.)   1.34

Lumber--

Per M. ft. at structure, April, 1905            $15.00
Per M. ft. at structure, April, 1907             22.50
Average cost per M. at structure                 19.00
Average cost per cu. yd. concrete                 0.49

Labor--                                    Max.   Min.

Common labor, cts. per hour                  20     17
Carpenters, cts. per hour                    40     30

With these prices and wages the average cost of concrete work for the
whole line was:

Item.                                   Per cu. yd.
Form building and removing                    $1.98
Mixing and placing concrete                    0.74
Placing reinforcement                          0.10
Wire, nails, water, etc.                       0.20
1.1 bbls. cement at $1.75                      1.93
½ cu. yd. sand at $0.72                        0.36
0.9 cu. yd. stone at $1.49                     1.34
Lumber for forms                               0.49
                                             ------
Total                                         $7.14

The following are the costs of specific structures built at different
times:

Example I.--Indian Creek Culvert. 14×15 ft., 250 long, completed
November, 1905:

                              Per cu. yd.
Cement                              $1.37
Sand                                  .34
Stone                                1.10
Labor                                2.48
Lumber                                .76
Miscellaneous                         .18

Total                               $6.23

Example II.--Third Street Abutments and Retaining Wall. Completed
November, 1906:

                               Per cu. yd.
Cement                               $1.78
Sand                                   .35
Stone                                 1.35
Lumber                                 .74
Labor                                 2.75
Miscellaneous                          .16
                                     -----
Total                                $7.13

Example III.--Abutments, Overhead Crossing with Union Pacific and Rock
Island. Completed May, 1907:

                               Per cu. yd.
Cement                               $1.92
Sand                                   .32
Stone                                 1.74
Lumber                                 .98
Labor                                 2.96
Miscellaneous                          .16
                                     -----
Total                                $8.08

~COST OF PLATE GIRDER BRIDGE ABUTMENTS.~--The following record of the
construction of 20 abutments for 10 four-track plate girder bridges over
streets in Chicago, Ill., are given by Mr. W. A. Rogers. The work was
done between May 1 and Oct. 1, 1898, in which time 8,400 cu. yds. of
concrete were placed, all the work being done by company labor. The
forms were made of 2-in. plank and 6×6-in. posts bolted together at the
top and bottom with ¾-in. rods. The lumber was used over and over again.
When the dressed plank became too poor for the face it was used for the
back. The concrete was 1 Portland cement, 3 gravel and 4 to 4½ limestone
(crusher run up to 3-in. size). A mortar face 1½ ins. thick was built up
with the rest of the concrete. The concrete was made quite wet, and each
man ramming averaged 18 cu. yds. a day rammed. The concrete was mixed by
a machine of the Ransome type, operated by a 12-HP. portable gasoline
engine. The load was very light for the engine, and 8 HP. would have
been sufficient. The engine made 235 revolutions per minute, and the
pulley wheels were proportioned so that the mixer made 12 revs, per
minute. One gallon of gasoline was used per hour, and the mixing was
carried on day and night so as not to give the concrete time to set. The
time required for each batch was 2 to 3 mins., and about ½ cu. yd. of
concrete was delivered per batch. The average output was 70 cu. yds. per
10-hr, shift, with a crew of 28 men; but as high as 96 cu. yds. were
mixed in 10 hrs. The concrete was far superior to hand mixed concrete.
The water for the concrete was measured in an upright tank and
discharged by a pipe into the mixer. The sand and stone were delivered
to the mixer in wheelbarrows, and the concrete was taken away in
wheelbarrows. No derricks were used at all. Each wheelbarrow of concrete
was raised by a rope passing over a pulley at the top of a gallows
frame, one horse and a driver serving for this raising. A small gasoline
hoisting engine would have been more satisfactory than the horse which
was worked to its full capacity. After the barrows were raised (12 ft.),
they were wheeled to the abutment forms and dumped. The empty
wheelbarrows were lowered by hand, by means of a rope passing over a
sheave and provided with a counterweight to check the descent of the
barrow. The cost of the concrete (built by company labor) was as
follows:

                                         Per cu. yd.

Cement, gravel and stone delivered            $3.28
Material in forms (used many time)              .11
Carpenters building and taking down forms       .34
Labor                                          1.18
                                              -----
Total per cu. yd                              $4.91

The labor cost includes moving plant from one bridge to the next,
building runways, gasoline for engine, oil for lights at night and
unloading materials, as well as mixing, transporting and placing
concrete. Wages were $1.75 per 10-hour day for laborers and $2.50 for
carpenters.

~COST OF ABUTMENTS AND PIERS, LONESOME VALLEY VIADUCT.~--Mr. Gustave R.
Tuska gives the following on the concrete substructure of the Lonesome
Valley Viaduct, near Knoxville, Tenn. There were two U-shaped abutments
and 36 concrete piers made of a light limestone that deteriorates
rapidly when used for masonry. Derricks were not needed as would have
been the case with masonry piers, and colored labor at $1 for 11 hrs.
could be used. The piers were made 4 ft. square on top, from 5 to 16 ft.
high, and with a batter of 1 in. to the foot. The abutments average 26
ft. high, 26 ft. long on the face, with wing walls 27 ft. long; the wall
at the bridge seat is 5 ft. thick, and the wing walls are 3½ ft. wide on
top. Batters are 1 in. to the foot.

The forms were made of 2-in. tongued and grooved plank, braced by posts
of 2×10-in. plank placed 3 ft. c. to c. for the abutments, and at each
corner for the piers. At the corners one side was dapped into the other,
so as to prevent leakage of cement. The posts were braced by batter
posts from the earth. For the piers a square frame was dropped over the
forms and spiked to the posts. The abutment forms were built up as the
concreting progressed. The north abutment forms were made in sections 6
ft. high, held by ¾-in. bolts buried in the concrete. The lower sections
were removed and used again on the upper part of the work, thus saving
plank. The inside of forms was painted with a thin coat of crude black
oil. The same form was used for several piers.

The concrete was 1-2-5, the barrel being the unit of measure, making
about ¾ cu. yd. of concrete per batch. The mortar was mixed with hoes,
but shovels were used to mix in the stone. By passing the blade of a
shovel between the form and the concrete, the stone was forced back and
a smooth mortar face was secured. Rammers weighing 30 to 40 lbs. were
used for tamping. Two days after the completion of a pier the forms were
removed. The concrete was protected from the sun by twigs, and was
watered twice a day for a week. It was found by actual measurement that
1 cu. yd. Of concrete (1-2-5), the ingredients being measured in
barrels, consisted of 1¼ bbls. of Atlas cement, 10 cu. ft. of sand, and
26½ cu. ft. of stone. The total amount of concrete was 926 cu. yds. of
which two-thirds was in the two abutments. The work was done (in 1894)
by contract, for $7 per cu. yd., cement costing $2.80 per bbl., sand 30
cts. per cu. yd., and wages $1 a day. A slight profit was made at this
price. A gang of 15 men and a foreman would mix and lay about 40 cu.
yds. in 11 hrs. when not delayed by lack of materials. The cost of
making the concrete, with wages at $1 a day, was:

                                                 Cts. per cu. yd.
1 man filling sand barrels and handling water        2.7
2 men filling rock barrels                           5.4
4 men mixing sand and cement                        10.6
4 men mixing stone and mortar                       10.6
2 men wheeling concrete                              5.3
1 man spreading concrete                             2.7
1 man tamping                                        2.7
1 foreman                                            5.0
                                                    ----
Total labor                                         45.0

~COST OF HAND MIXING AND WHEELBARROW WORK FOR FOUR BRIDGE PIERS.~--The
following figures of the cost of hand-mixed concrete for bridge piers
and abutments are given by Mr. Fred R. Charles of Richmond, Ind. The
figures cover three jobs. All concrete was mixed by hand and with one
exception noted below was moved to place in wheelbarrows. The concrete
was a 1-2½-5½ mixture. In this connection it is well to note that in one
or two of the jobs where the proportion of the aggregate seems too small
for the yardage of concrete the difference is accounted for by the fact
that large stones were placed in the foundations, these stone being on
the ground and costing nothing but the labor to throw them in.

_Job I._--The first job consisted of the construction of one abutment
and six piers for a bridge over the Miami River at Fernald, O. The stone
was procured on the site and crushed by a portable crusher run by a
traction engine. The rough stone cost 10 cts. a cubic yard, and this,
with the cost of handling, fuel and hire of engine and crusher, made the
cost of crushed stone about $1 per cu. yd. Sand was obtained close to
the work, but the cement had to be teamed 10 miles. Labor was paid $1.75
per day. The cost of materials and labor per cubic yard of concrete in
place was as follows:

Item.                                             Per cu. yd.
1.16 bbls. cement at $2.10                              $1.58
Sand                                                     0.35
Stone                                                    0.75
Lumber                                                   0.64
Tools, hardware, etc.                                    0.20
Labor (including 15 cts. per cu. yd. for pumping)        2.78
                                                        -----
      Total materials and labor                         $6.30

_Job II._--The second job was the construction of two abutments
containing 434 cu. yds. of concrete for a viaduct at Ernst Street,
Cincinnati, O. The abutments were constructed at the street and the
excavation was clay and shale. Labor received $1.75 per day. The cost of
materials and labor per cubic yard of concrete in place was as follows:

  Materials--                           Per cu. yd.
376 bbls. cement at $1.70                     $1.48
224 cu. yds. sand at $1.20                     0.64
255 cu. yds. stone at $1.55                    1.00
Lumber                                         0.40
Tools, hardware, etc.                          0.06

       Total materials                        $3.58

  Labor--
Clearing and excavating                       $1.12
Mixing and placing concrete                    1.13
Building forms, etc.                           0.25
                                              -----
       Total labor                            $2.50
       Total labor and materials              $6.08

_Job III._--This job consisted in placing 570 cu. yds. of concrete in
the pedestals for a viaduct at Quebec Avenue, Cincinnati, O. The
pedestals were 5 ft. square on top and from 8 to 20 ft. high. The
location of the work was very inconvenient for the delivery of
materials, all materials having to be teamed or wheeled. Labor was paid
$1.75 per day. The cost of labor and materials per cubic yard of
concrete in place was as follows:

Item.                                  Per cu. yd.
500 bbls. cement at $1.60                    $1.40
239 cu. yds. sand at $1.25                    0.53
560 cu. yds. stone at $1.88                   1.84
Lumber                                        0.38
Tools, hardware, etc.                         0.05
Labor                                         2.96
                                             -----
Total labor and materials                    $7.16

_Job IV._--This job consisted in placing 2,111 cu. yds. of concrete in a
railway viaduct at Cincinnati, O. For one pier 56 ft. high the concrete
was raised to place by a derrick; for the remainder of the work it was
wheeled or teamed to place. Labor was paid $1.75 per day. The cost of
labor and materials per cubic yard of concrete in place was as follows:

Item.                                   Per cu. yd.
1,908 bbls. cement at $1.60                   $1.44
1,105 cu. yds. sand at $1.95                   0.50
1,468 cu. yds. stone at $1.48                  1.03
Lumber                                         0.54
Tools, hardware, etc.                          0.25
Water                                          0.03
Labor                                          3.44
                                              -----
Total labor and materials                     $7.23




CHAPTER XIII.

METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING RETAINING WALLS.


Concrete retaining walls may for construction purposes be divided into
two classes: Plain concrete walls of gravity section and reinforced
concrete walls consisting of a thin slab taking the thrust of the earth
as a cantilever anchored to a base slab or as a flat beam between
counterforts. The reinforced wall requires much less concrete for a
given height than does the plain, gravity wall, but the concrete is more
expensive owing to the reinforcement and to the more complex form of
construction, and, in some measure, to the greater cost of placing the
mixture in narrow forms and around reinforcement. It is common, too, to
require a richer concrete for the reinforced than for the plain wall.

[Illustration: Fig. 98.--Comparison of Plain and Reinforced Sections for
Retaining Walls (C. E. Graff).]

~COMPARATIVE ECONOMY OF PLAIN AND REINFORCED CONCRETE WALLS.~--Prior to
the construction of some 2,000 ft. of retaining wall ranging in height
from 2 ft. to 38 ft., at Seattle, Wash., calculation was made by the
engineers of the Great Northern Ry. to determine the comparative economy
of plain concrete and reinforced concrete sections. The sections assumed
were those shown by Fig. 98, and comparisons were made at heights of 10,
20, 30 and 40 ft., with the following results:

Height in               Plain.           Reinforced.       Per cent.
feet.                 Cu. yds. per ft.  Cu. yds. per ft.    Saving.
10                        1.63              1.29             20.4
20                        4.08              2.59             36.4
30                        8.40              4.73             43.3
40                       14.70              8.07             45.0

The saving in concrete increased as the height of the wall increased;
for a 40-ft. wall reinforced concrete at nearly double the cost per
cubic yard in place would be as cheap as plain concrete.

[Illustration: Fig. 99.--Comparison of Plain and Reinforced Sections for
Retaining Wall (F. F. Sinks).]

Taking substantially the section of reinforced wall being used on the
Chicago track elevation work of the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R. R.,
and comparing it with a plain wall as shown by Fig. 99, Mr. F. F. Sinks
obtained the following results:

Plain Wall, Cost per Lineal Foot--
4.8 cu. yds. concrete at $4                   $19.20
115 ft. B. M. of forms at $31                   3.56
                                              ------
Total 4.8 cu. yds. at $4.74                   $22.76

Reinforced Wall, Cost per Lineal Foot--
3.46 cu. yds. concrete at $4.10               $14.18
115 ft. B. M. of forms at $31                   3.56
109 lbs. reinforcing steel at 3¼ cts.           3.54
1.34 cu. yds. extra fill at 20 cts.             0.27
0.32 cu. yd. extra excavation at 20 cts.        0.06
                                               -----
Total, 3.46 cu. yds. concrete at $6.25        $21.61

The saving in this case was $1.15 per lineal foot of wall with the unit
cost of reinforced concrete in place 24 per cent. greater than the unit
cost of plain concrete. It will be noted that there is some 28 per cent.
less concrete per lineal foot of wall in the reinforced section and also
that this section is so designed that the form work is about as simple
for one section as for the other. Another point to be noticed is that
there is no saving in excavation by using a reinforced section instead
of a gravity section, in fact the excavation runs slightly more for the
reinforced section.

[Illustration: Fig. 100.--Forms for Retaining Wall Work, N. Y. C. & H.
R. R. R.]

~FORM CONSTRUCTION.~--Retaining wall work often affords an opportunity for
constructing the forms in panels and this opportunity should be taken
advantage of when possible. Several of the walls described later give
examples of form work that may be studied with profit in this respect.

Figure 100 shows a panel form construction employed on the New York
Central & Hudson River R. R. The 3×8-in. studs are erected, care being
taken to get them in proper line and to true batter and also to brace
them rigidly by diagonal props. Generally the studding is erected for a
section of wall 50 ft. long at one time. The lagging, made in panels 2½
ft. wide and 10 ft. long, by nailing 2-in. plank to 2×4-in. cleats, is
attached to the studding a panel at a time and beginning at the bottom,
by means of the straps, wedges and blocks shown. Five bottom panels
making a form 2½ ft. high and 50 ft. long are placed first. When the
concrete has been brought up nearly to the top of these panels, a second
row of panels is placed on top of the first. When it is judged that the
concrete is hard enough the lowermost panels are loosened and made free
by removing the wedges, blocks and straps and the panels are drawn out
endwise from behind the studding and used over again for one of the
upper courses. The small size of the panels makes it practicable to lay
bare the concrete while it is yet soft enough to work with a float or to
finish by scrubbing as described in Chapter VIII. In cases where this
object is not sought, panels of much larger size may be used. Working
with panels 2¼×12½ ft. of 2-in. plank it was found that each panel could
be used 16 times before becoming unfit for further use, but as, owing to
the nicety of molded surface demanded, panels were discarded when
showing comparatively small blemishes, this record cannot be taken as a
true indication of the life of such forms. These panel forms are used by
the railway named for long abutments and piers as well as for retaining
walls.

A different type of sectional form construction is illustrated by Figs.
101 and 102. It has been extensively used for retaining wall work by the
Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R. R. The studding and waling are framed in
units as shown. The lagging is framed in panels for the rear of the
wall, for the face of the coping, and for the inclined toe of the wall,
and is ordinary sheathing boards for the main face of the wall. The
make-up of the several panels is shown by the drawings. The reason for
using ordinary sheathing instead of panels for the face of the wall is
stated by Mr. L. J. Hotchkiss, Assistant Bridge Engineer, to be that
"the sections become battered and warped with use, do not fit closely
together, and leave the wall rough when they are removed." The manner of
bracing the form and of anchoring it down against the up-thrust of the
wet concrete is shown by Fig. 102.

Two other examples of sectional form construction are given in the
succeeding descriptions of work for the Grand Central Station terminal
in New York City and for the Chicago Drainage Canal. In the former work
it is notable that panels 51×20 ft. were used, being handled by
locomotive crane. The panels used on the drainage canal work and in the
forms previously described are of sizes that can be taken down and
erected by hand, and the means of handling them should always be given
consideration in deciding on the sizes to be adopted for form panels not
only in wall construction but in any other class of work where sectional
forms may be used. Wet spruce or yellow pine will weigh 4½ lbs. per ft.
B. M., so that a panel 10×2½ ft. made of 2-in. plank and three 2×4-in.
battens will weigh some 225 lbs. In form work where the panels are
removed and re-erected in succession facility in handling is an
important matter. When one figures that he may handle both the concrete
and the form panels with it a cableway or a locomotive crane becomes a
tool well worth considering in heavy wall work.

[Illustration: Fig. 101.--Forms for Retaining Wall Work, C., B. & Q. R.
R.]

Three details in retaining wall form work that are often sources of
annoyance out of proportion to their magnitude are alignment, coping
construction and wall ties. Small variations from line in the face of
the wall are seldom noticeable, but a wavy coping shows at a glance.
For this reason it is often wise to build the coping after the main body
of the wall has been stripped, or if both are built together to provide
in the forms some independent means of lining up the coping molds. In
the form shown by Fig. 101 the latter is done by bracing the coping
panel so as to permit it to be set and lined up independently of the
main form. A separate form for molding the coping after the main body of
the wall is completed may be constructed as shown by Fig. 103. Bolts at
B and C permit the yokes to be collapsed and the form to be shifted
ahead as the work advances. This mold provides for beveling the top
edges of the coping and also the edge of the overhang, and the beveling
or rounding of these edges should never be omitted where a neat
appearance is desired. It is not essential, however, that this finishing
be done in the molds. By stripping the concrete while it is still
pliable the edges can be worked down by the ordinary cement sidewalk
edger.

[Illustration: Fig. 102.--Sketch Showing Method of Bracing Form Shown by
Fig. 101.]

[Illustration: Fig. 103.--Sectional Form for Constructing Coping.]

Wall ties are commonly used to hold the face and back forms to proper
spacing, but occasionally they are not permitted. In the latter case the
bracing must be arranged to hold the forms from tipping inward as well
as from being thrust outward. A good arrangement is that shown by Fig.
102. In fastening the forms with ties the choice is usually between long
bolts which are removed when the molds are taken down and wire ties
which are left embedded in the concrete. The selection to be made
depends upon the character of the work. When sectional forms are used
like the one shown by Fig. 101, for long stretches of wall of nearly
uniform cross-section bolts are generally more economical and always
more secure. If the bolts are sleeved with scrap gas pipe having the
ends corked with waste the bolts can be removed ordinarily without
difficulty. To make the pipe sleeve serve also as a spacer the end next
the face may be capped with a wooden washer which is removed and the
hole plastered when the forms are taken down. With bolt ties the forms
can be filled to a depth of 15 to 20 ft with sloppy concrete. This is
hardly safe with wire ties unless more wire and better tieing are
employed than is usual. It takes four strands of No. 10 to give the same
working stress as a ½-in. threaded rod and the tieing in of four strands
of wire so that they will be without slack and give is a task requiring
some skill. Bolts are much more easily placed and made tight. In the
matter of cost of metal left in the wall, the question is between the
cost of scrap gas pipe and of wire; the pound price of the wire is
greater but fewer pounds are used and the metal is in more convenient
shape to cut to length and to handle. This convenience in shaping the
tie to the work gives the advantage to wire ties for isolated jobs or
jobs which involve a continual change in the length and spacing of the
ties. In general the contractor will find bolts preferable where
sectional forms are used and wire ties preferable when using continuous
forms.

One objection urged against the use of wire ties is that the metal is
exposed at the face of the work when they are clipped off unless the
concrete is chipped and the cavity plastered. To obviate this objection
various forms of removable "heads" have been devised. Two such devices
are shown by Figs. 104 and 105. In both the bolt is unscrewed, leaving
the "heads" embedded. The head shown by Fig. 104 has the advantage that
it can be made by any blacksmith, while the head shown by Fig. 105 is a
special casting.

[Illustration: Fig. 104.--Tie for Wall Forms.]

[Illustration: Fig. 105.--Tie for Wall Forms.]

~MIXING AND PLACING CONCRETE.~--Where a long stretch of wall is to be
built the system of mixing and handling the concrete must be capable of
being shifted along the work. For isolated walls of short length this
problem is a simpler one. Where the mixer can be installed on the bank
above, wheeling to chutes reaching down to the work is the best
solution. As shown in Chapter IV concrete can be successfully and
economically chuted to place to a greater extent than most contractors
realize. Where the mixer has to be installed at the foot of the wall
wheelbarrow inclines, derricks, gallows frames, etc., suggest themselves
as means of handling the concrete. It is not this class of work,
however, but the long stretches of heavy section walls such as occur in
depressed or elevated railway work in cities that call for thought in
the arrangement and selection of mixing and handling plant.

In building the many miles of retaining wall in the work of doing away
with grade crossings in Chicago, Ill., trains made up of a mixer car and
several material cars have been used. The mixer is mounted on a flat car
set at the head of the train and is covered by a decking carrying two
charging hoppers set above the mixer. The material cars are arranged
behind, the sand and stone or gravel being in gondola cars. Portable
brackets hooked to the sides of the gondola cars carry runways for
wheelbarrows. Sand and stone or gravel are wheeled to the charging
hoppers, the work being continuous since one hopper is being filled
while the other is being discharged into the mixer. The mixer discharges
either into a chute, wheelbarrows or buckets. The foregoing is the
general arrangement; it is modified in special instances, as is
mentioned further on. The chief objection to the method is the
difficulty of loading the wheelbarrows standing on runways level with
the tops of the gondola sides. The lift from the bottom of the car is
excessive, and as pointed out previously, shoveling stone or gravel by
digging into it from the top is a difficult task.

The delivery of the concrete into the forms was accomplished by chute
where possible, otherwise by wheelbarrows or cranes, and in one case by
belt conveyor. In the last instance the mixer car was equipped with a
Drake continuous mixer and was set in front. Behind it came three or
four gondola cars of sand and stone, and at the rear end a box car of
cement. All material was wheeled on side runways to two charging hoppers
over the mixer. The mixer discharged onto a belt conveyor carried by a
25-ft. boom guyed to an A-frame on the car and pivoted at the car end to
swing 180° by means of a tag line. The outer end of the conveyor was
swung over the forms. A ¾-in. wire rope wrapped eight times around two
drums on the mixer car and passing through slots in the floor to anchors
placed one 500 ft. in front and one 500 ft. to the rear enabled the
train to be moved back and forth along the work. This scheme of
self-propulsion saved the hire of a locomotive. In another case the
mixer was discharged into buckets which were handled by a crane
traveling back and forth along a track laid on two flat cars.

[Illustration: Fig. 106.--Side Elevation of Traveling Mixer Plant,
Galveston Sea Wall.]

Another type of movable mixer plant used in constructing a sea-wall some
3½ miles long at Galveston, Tex., is shown by Figs. 106 and 107. Two of
these machines mixed and placed some 127,000 cu. yds. of concrete, in 1
cu. yd. batches. Two 12-HP. engines operated the derricks and one 16-HP.
engine operated the Smith mixer; all engines took steam from a 50-HP.
boiler. The rated capacity of each machine was 300 to 350 cu. yds. per
day. The method of operation is clearly indicated by the drawings.

[Illustration: Fig. 107.--End Elevation of Traveling-Mixer, Galveston
Sea Wall.]

Placing the concrete in the forms is generally required to be done in
layers; with wet mixtures this means little more than distributing the
concrete somewhat evenly along the wall and slicing and puddling it to
get rid of air and prevent segregation. Where mortar facing is required
the face form described in Chapter VIII may be used. A reasonably good
surface can be secured without mortar facing by spading the face. With
dry concrete, placing and ramming in layers, calls for such care as is
necessary in dry concrete work everywhere. Where new concrete has to be
placed on concrete placed the day before, good bond may be secured and
the chance of efflorescence be reduced by the methods described in
Chapter VIII.

~WALLS IN TRENCH.~--In canal excavation, in subway work in cities, and the
like, it is often necessary to dig trenches and build retaining walls in
them before excavating the core of earth between the walls. The
following examples of such work are taken from personal records:

_Example I._--A Smith mixer was used, the concrete being delivered where
wanted by a Lambert cableway of 400 ft. span. The broken stone and sand
were delivered near the work in hopper-bottom cars which were dumped
through a trestle onto a plank floor. Men loaded the material into
one-horse dump carts which hauled it 900 ft. to the mixer platform. This
platform was 24×24 ft. square, and 5 ft. high, with a planked approach
40 ft. long and contained 7,300 ft. B. M. The stone and sand were dumped
at the mouth of the mixer and shoveled in by 4 men. Eight men, working
in pairs, loaded the broken stone into the carts, and 2 men loaded the
sand. Each cart was loaded with about 70 shovelfuls of stone on top of
which 35 shovelfuls of sand were thrown. It took 3 to 5 minutes to load
on the stone and 1 minute to load the sand. The carts traveled very
slowly, about 150 ft. a minute--in fact, all the men on the job,
including the cart drivers, were slow. After mixing, the concrete was
dumped into iron buckets holding 14 cu. ft. water measure, making about
½ cu. yd. in a batch. The buckets were hooked on to the cableway and
conveyed where wanted in the wall. Steam for running the mixer was taken
from the same boiler that supplied the cableway engine. The average
output of this plant was 100 cu. yds. of concrete per 10-hour day,
although on many days the output was 125 cu. yds., or 250 batches. The
cost of mixing and placing was as follows, on a basis of 100 cu. yds.
per day:

                                     Per day.     Per cu. yd.

 8 men loading stone into carts       $12.00       $ .12
 2 men loading sand into carts          3.00         .03
 1 cart hauling cement                  3.00         .03
 8 carts hauling stone and sand        24.00         .24
 4 men loading mixer                    6.00         .06
 1 man dumping mixer                    1.50         .01
 2 men handling buckets at mixer        3.00         .03
 6 men dumping buckets and ramming      9.00         .09
12 men making forms at $2.50           30.00         .30
 1 cable engineman                      3.00         .03
 1 fireman                              2.00         .02
 1 foreman                              6.00         .06
 1 waterboy                             1.00         .01
 1 ton coal for cableway and mixer      4.00         .04
                                     -------       -----
Total                                $107.50       $1.07

In addition to this cost of $1.07 per cu. yd. there was the cost of
moving the whole plant for every 350 ft. of wall. This required 2 days,
at a cost of $100, and as there were about 1,000 cu. yds. of concrete in
350 ft. of wall 16 ft. high, the cost of moving the plant was 10 cts.
per cu. yd. of concrete, bringing the total cost of mixing and placing
up to $1.17 per cu. yd. As above stated, the whole gang was slow.

The labor cost of making the forms was high, for such simple and heavy
work, costing $10 per M. of lumber placed each day. The forms were 2-in.
sheeting plank held by 4×6-in. upright studs 2½ ft. apart, which were
braced against the sides of the trench. The face of the forms was
dressed lumber and all cracks were carefully puttied and sandpapered.

The above costs relate only to the massive part of the wall and not the
cost of putting in the facing mortar, which was excessively high. The
face mortar was 2 ins. thick, and about 3½ cu. yds. of it were placed
each day with a force of 8 men! Two of these men mixed the mortar, 2 men
wheeled it in barrows to the wall, 2 men lowered it in buckets, and 2
men put it in place on the face of the wall. If we distribute this labor
cost on the face mortar over the 100 cu. yds. of concrete laid each day,
we have another 12 cts. per cu. yd.; but a better way is to regard this
work as a separate item, and estimate it as square feet of facing work.
In that case these 8 men did 500 sq. ft. of facing work per day at a
cost of nearly 2½ cts. per sq. ft. for labor.

_Example II._--The building of a wall similar to the one just described
was done by another gang as follows: The stone and sand were delivered
in flat cars provided with side boards. In a stone car 5 men were kept
busy shoveling stone into iron dump buckets having a capacity of 20 cu.
ft. water measure. Each bucket was filled about two-thirds full of
stone, then it was picked up by a derrick and swung over to the next car
which contained sand, where two men filled the remaining third of the
bucket with sand. The bucket was then lifted and swung by the derrick
over to the platform of the mixer where it was dumped and its contents
shoveled by four men into the mixer, cement being added by these men.
The mixer was dumped by two men, loading iron buckets holding about ½
cu. yd. of concrete each, which was the size of each batch. A second
derrick picked up the concrete bucket and swung it over to a platform
where it was dumped by one man; then ten men loaded the concrete into
wheelbarrows and wheeled it along a runway to the wall. One man assisted
each barrow in dumping into a hopper on the top of a sheet-iron pipe
which delivered the concrete. The two derricks were stiff-leg derricks
with 40-ft. booms, provided with bull-wheels, and operated by double
cylinder (7×10-in.) engines of 18-HP. each. About 1 ton of coal was
burned daily under the boiler supplying steam to these two hoisting
engines. The output of this plant was 200 batches or 100 cu. yds. of
concrete per 10-hr. day, when materials were promptly supplied by the
railroad; but delays in delivering cars ran the average output down to
80 cu. yds. per day.

On the basis of 100 cu. yds. daily output, the cost of mixing and
placing the concrete was as follows:

                                        Per day.     Per cu. yd.
5 men loading stone                       $ 7.50       $.07½
2 men loading sand                          3.00        .03
4 men charging mixer                        6.00        .06
2 men loading concrete into buckets         3.00        .03
1 man dumping concrete from buckets          .50        .01½
10 men loading and wheeling concrete         .00        .15
1 man dumping wheelbarrows                  1.50        .01½
3 men spreading and ramming                 4.50        .04½
2 enginemen                                 5.00        .05
1 fireman                                   2.00        .02
1 waterboy                                  1.00        .01
1 foreman                                   6.00        .06
10 men making forms                        25.00        .25
1 ton coal                                  4.00        .04
Total                                      85.00       $.85

In addition there were 8 men engaged in mixing and placing the 2-in.
facing of mortar as stated above.

~CHICAGO DRAINAGE CANAL.~--The method and cost of constructing some 20,000
ft. of concrete wall by contract in building the Chicago Drainage Canal
is compiled from records kept by Mr. James W. Beardsley. The work was
done on two separate sections, Section 14 and Section 15. In both cases
a 1-1½-4 natural cement concrete was used with a 3-in. facing and a
3-in. coping of 1-3 Portland cement mortar.

_Section 14._--The average height of the wall was 10 ft., and the
thickness at base was one-half the height. The stone for the concrete
was obtained from the spoil bank of the canal, loaded into wheelbarrows
and wheeled about 100 ft. to the crusher; some was hauled in wagons. An
Austin jaw crusher was used, and it discharged the stone into bins from
which it was fed into a Sooysmith mixer. The crusher and the mixer were
mounted on a flat car. Bucket elevators were used to raise the stone,
sand and cement from their bins to the mixer; the buckets were made of
such size as to give the proper proportions of ingredients, as they all
traveled at the same speed. Only two laborers were required to look
after the elevators. The sand and cement were hauled by teams and dumped
into the receiving bins. There were 23,568 cu. yds. on Section 14 and
the cost was as follows:

                        Typical   Wages per    Cost per
General force:           force.    10 hrs.      cu. yd.
  Superintendent            1.0     $5.00        $0.026
  Blacksmith                1.1      2.75         0.016
  Timekeeper                0.5      2.50         0.007
  Watchman                  0.6      2.00         0.007
  Waterboys                 3.9      1.00         0.022

Wall force:
  Foreman                   0.9      2.50         0.013
  Laborers                  8.6      1.50         0.073
  Tampers                   2.3      1.75         0.022

Mixer force:
  Foreman                   1.2      2.50         0.017
  Enginemen                 1.8      2.50         0.025
  Laborers                  6.7      1.50         0.057
  Pump runner               1.0      2.00         0.010
  Mixing machines           1.7      1.25         0.012

Timber force:
  Foreman                   0.6      2.50         0.008
  Carpenters                4.7      2.50         0.057
  Laborers                  1.2      1.50         0.010
  Helpers                   5.3      2.50         0.075

Hauling force:
  Laborers                  2.6      1.75         0.026
  Teams                     6.3      3.25         0.116

Crushing force:
  Foreman                   0.5      2.50         0.007
  Engineman                 1.7      2.50         0.023
  Laborers                  3.5      1.50         0.032
  Austin crushers           1.7      1.20         0.011

Loading stone:
  Foreman                   1.7      2.50         0.023
  Laborers                 32.9      1.50         0.280
                                                 ------
      Total for crushing, mixing and placing     $0.975

The daily costs charged to the mixers and crushers include the cost of
coal, at $2 a ton, and the cost of oil.

The gang "loading stone" apparently did a good deal of sledging of large
stones, and they also wheeled a large part of it in barrows to the
crusher.

The plant cost $9,600, distributed as follows:

2 jaw crushers         $3,000
2 mixers                3,000
Track                   1,260
Lumber                    500
Pipe                      840
Sheds                     400
Pumps                     600
                        -----
Total                  $9,600

If this first cost of the plant were distributed over the 23,568 cu.
yds. of concrete it would amount to 41 cts. per cu. yd.

The cost of the concrete was as follows:

                                      Per cu. yd.

Utica cement, at $0.65 per bbl.          $0.863
Portland cement, at $2.25 per bbl.        0.305
Sand, at $1.35 per cu. yd.                0.465
Stone and labor, as above given           0.975
                                         ------
Total                                    $2.608
First cost of plant                      $0.407

_Section 15._--The conditions on this section were much the same as on
Section 14, just described, except that the limestone was quarried from
the bed of the canal, and was crushed in a stationary crusher, No. 7
Gates. The stone was hauled 1,000 ft. to the crusher on cars drawn by a
cable from a hoisting engine. The output of this crusher averaged 210
cu. yds. per day of 10 hrs. The crushed stone was hauled in dump cars,
drawn by a locomotive, to the mixers. Spiral screw mixers mounted on
flat cars were used, and they delivered the concrete to belt conveyors
which delivered the concrete into the forms.

The forms on Section 15 (and on Section 14 as well) consisted of upright
posts set 8 ft. apart and 9 ins. in front of the wall, held at the toe
by iron dowels driven into holes in the rock, and held to the rear posts
by tie rods. The plank sheeting was made up in panels 2 ft. wide and 16
ft. long, and was held up temporarily by loose rings which passed around
the posts which were gripped by the friction of the rings. These panels
were brought to proper line and held in place by wooden wedges. After
the concrete had set 24 hrs. the wedges were struck, the panels removed
and scraped clean ready to be used again.

The cost of quarrying and crushing the stone, and mixing the concrete on
Section 15 was as follows:

                     Typical Wages per Cost per
General force--      force.   10 hrs.   cu. yd.
Superintendent         1.0     $5.00     $0.024
Blacksmith             0.9      2.75      0.011
Teams                  1.7      3.00      0.025
Waterboy               4.5      1.00      0.022

Wall force--
Foreman                1.1      2.50      0.010
Laborers              14.4      1.50      0.105
Tampers                0.1      1.75      0.001

Mixer force--
Foreman                2.1      2.50      0.026
Enginemen              2.1      2.50      0.022
Laborers              23.1      1.50      0.180
Mixing machines        2.1      1.25      0.022

Timber force--
Carpenters             0.8      3.00      0.013
Laborers               0.7      1.50      0.005
Helpers               10.2      2.50      0.125

Hauling force--
Foreman                0.7      2.50      0.009
Enginemen              1.4      2.50      0.019
Fireman                0.4      1.75      0.003
Brakeman               2.2      2.00      0.018
Teams                  0.4      3.25      0.007
Laborers               1.5      1.50      0.010
Locomotives            1.4      2.25      0.015

Crushing force--
Foreman                1.0      2.50      0.014
Enginemen              1.0      2.50      0.014
Laborers              11.1      1.50      0.081
Firemen                1.0      1.75      0.008
Gyratory crusher       1.0      2.25      0.011

Quarry force--
Foreman                1.2      2.50      0.012
Laborers              19.0      1.50      0.140
Drillers               1.8      2.00      0.017
Drill helpers          1.8      1.50      0.013
Machine drills         1.8      1.25      0.011
                                         ------
                                         $0.993

The first cost of the plant for this work on Section 15 was $25,420,
distributed as follows:

1 crusher, No. 7 Gates           $12,000
Use of locomotive                  2,200
Car and track                      5,300
3 mixers                           3,000
Lumber                             1,200
Pipe                                 720
Small tools                        1,000
                                 -------
Total                            $25,420

This $25,420 distributed over the 44,811 cu. yds. of concrete amounts to
57 cts. per cu. yd.

It will be noted that 2 mixers were kept busy. Their average output was
100 cu. yds. each per day, which is the same as for the mixers on
Section 14.

The total cost of concrete on Section 15 was as follows:

                                           Per cu. yd.
Labor quarrying, crushing and mixing            $0.991
Explosives                                       0.083
Utica cement, at $0.60 per bbl.                  0.930
Portland cement, at $2.25 per bbl.               0.180
Sand, at $1.35 per cu. yd.                       0.476
                                                ------
Total                                           $2,660
First cost of plant                             $0.567

It is not strictly correct to charge the full first cost of the plant to
the work as it possessed considerable salvage value at the end.

_Comparison._--For the purpose of comparing Sections 14 and 15 the
following summary is given of the cost per cubic yard of concrete:

                           Sec. 14.     Sec. 15.
General force              $0.078       $0.082
Wall force                  0.108        0.116
Mixing force                0.121        0.250
Timbering force             0.150        0.140
Hauling force               0.142        0.081
Crushing force              0.073        0.128
Quarry force                0.303        0.275
Cement, natural             0.863        0.930
Cement, Portland            0.305        0.180
Sand                        0.465        0.476
Plant (full cost)           0.407        0.567
                           ------      -------
Total                      $3.015       $3.225

It should be remembered that on Section 14 there was no drilling and
blasting of the rock, but that the "quarry force" not only loaded but
hauled the stone to the crusher. The cost of mixing on Section 15 is
higher than on Section 14 because the materials were dumped on platforms
and shoveled into the mixer, instead of being discharged from bins into
the mixer as on Section 14.

[Illustration: Fig. 108.--Cross Section of Retaining Wall. New York
Central Terminal Work.]

[Illustration: Fig. 109.--Portable Concrete Mixing Tower, N. Y. Central
Terminal Work.]

~GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL, NEW YORK, N. Y.~--In building a retaining wall of
the cross-section, shown in Fig. 108, a traveling tower moving on tracks
parallel to the wall contained the concrete mixing plant. The
construction of the tower is shown in Fig. 109. The tower had two
platforms, one at the top carrying two 10-cu. yd. bins for sand and
stone and the other directly below carrying 40 cu. ft. (4 cu. ft.
cement, 12 cu. ft. sand and 24 cu. ft. stone) Ransome mixer driven by a
30 H.P. motor and a Lidgerwood motor hoist. The elevator tower carried
two 40-cu. ft. Ransome dumping buckets traveling in guides and dumping
automatically into the bins. These buckets were operated by the
Lidgerwood motor hoist on the mixer platform. Sand and broken stone on
flat cars were brought alongside the tower. The sand was shoveled direct
from the car into the sand bucket, but the broken stone was shoveled
into wheelbarrows which were wheeled over a light bridging from car to
bucket and dumped. Wheelbarrows were used for handling the stone chiefly
because the capacity of the plant was so great that enough men could not
be worked in the limited space around the bucket to keep up the supply
by shoveling. The wheelbarrow work added materially to the cost. Cement
was carried from the cars to the sand bucket, hoisted and stored on the
mixer platform which provided storage room for 100 bags. A 1-3-6 mixture
was used; the sand and stone were chuted directly from the bins to the
charging hopper and the cement was charged by hand. The mixed concrete
was delivered to two 1 cu. yd. dump cars running on a 2-ft. gage track
laid in sections on the cross pieces connecting the uprights of the
forms. The track had no switches, so that one car had to wait for the
other. Four men were required to push each car and two more men assisted
in dumping the car and kept the track clear. The wall was built in
sections 51 ft. long, each containing 250 cu. yds. One of these sections
was filled in 8 hours with ease and by a little hustling a section was
filled in 6¾ hours, which is at the rate of 37 cu. yds. of concrete per
hour. Working 8 hours per day the cost of mixing, transporting and
placing concrete with this mixing plant, with wages for common labor of
$1.50 per day, was as follows:

                                         Total.     Per cu. yd.
2 men carrying cement                  $  3.00        $0.012
6 men shoveling sand                      9.00         0.036
17 men shoveling stone                   25.00         0.100
11 men wheeling stone                    16.00         0.064
2 men at stone and sand bins              3.00         0.012
2 men opening cement bags                 3.00         0.012
1 man dumping hopper                      1.50         0.006
1 man dumping mixer                       1.50         0.006
1 man cleaning chute, mixer, etc.         1.50         0.006
1 motorman or engineer                    3.00         0.012
                                       -------       -------
  Total labor mixing                    $66.50        $0.266
8 men pushing 2 cars                     12.00         0.048
2 men cleaning track, etc.                3.00         0.012
7 men spading concrete                   10.50         0.042
                                       -------       -------
  Total labor transporting, placing    $ 25.50        $0.102
1 foreman                                 5.00         0.020
Electricity estimated                     7.00         0.028
                                       -------       -------
  Total general                        $ 12.00        $0.048
           Grand total                 $104.00        $0.416

It will be noted that the cost of shoveling and wheeling the broken
stone amounts to 16.4 cts. per cu. yd., or nearly 40 per cent. of the
total cost of mixing and placing. The cost of spading the concrete is
also high for a sloppy mixture, but is probably accounted for by the
fact that the concrete had to be spaded so as to have 2 or 3 ins. of
clear mortar next the forms. The forms used in constructing the wall
are shown by Figs. 110 and 111. They were made in panels 51 ft. long and
a locomotive crane was used to shift the panels. This crane worked
handling forms only a small part of the time, but a form gang of 10
carpenters was kept busy all of the time moving and reassembling.
Assuming the work of the crane to amount to $5 per day and the wages of
the carpenter gang to amount to $25, we get a cost of 12 cts. per cubic
yard of concrete for shifting forms. It should be noted carefully that
the costs given for this work do not include cost of materials, interest
on plant, superintendence and other items.

[Illustration: Fig. 110.--End View of Forms for Retaining Wall, New York
Central Terminal Work.]

~WALL FOR RAILWAY YARD.~--For building a retaining wall 7 ft. high, forms
were made and placed by a carpenter and helper at $8 per M., wages being
35 cts. and 20 cts. an hour, respectively. Concrete materials were
dumped from wagons alongside the mixing board. Ramming was unusually
thorough. Foreman expense was high, due to small number in gang; 2 cu.
yds. were laid per hour by the gang.

[Illustration: Fig. 111.--Corner Detail of Retaining Wall Forms, New
York Central Terminal Work.]

                                             Per day.     Per cu. yd.
7 mixers, 15 cts. per hour                    $10.50        $0.53
2 rammers, 15 cts. per hour                     3.00         0.15
1 foreman 30 cts. per hr., 1 waterboy 5 cts.    3.50         0.17
                                             -------       ------
Total labor                                   $17.00        $0.85

The total cost was as follows per cubic yard:

                                            Per cu. yd.
0.8 bbls. Portland cement, at $2               $1.60
Sand                                            0.30
Gravel                                          0.70
Labor mixing and placing                        0.85
Lumber for forms, at $16 per M.                 0.56
Labor on forms, at $8 per M.                    0.28
                                              ------
Total, per cubic yard                          $4.29

The sheathing plank for the forms was 2-in. hemlock.

~CONCRETE FOOTING FOR RUBBLE MASONRY RETAINING WALL.~--In constructing a
footing for a retaining wall at Grand Rapids, Mich., a 1-2½-5 natural
cement concrete was used. It was found that 1 cu. yd. of concrete was
equivalent to 29.8 cu. ft. of material composed of 3.6 cu. ft. or 1.1
bbls. of cement, 8.4 cu. ft. or 2.7 bbls. of sand and 17.8 cu. ft. or
5.5 bbl. of broken stone. The labor cost of 15.5 cu. yds. of concrete
was as follows:

Item.                                   Total.     Per cu. yd.
Foreman, 14 hours at 40 cts.           $ 5.60       $0.3613
Foreman, 20 hours at 22.5 cts.           4.50        0.2903
Laborers, 49 hours at 12.5 cts.          6.11        0.3942
Mason, 2 hours at 35 cts.                0.70        0.0451
                                       ------      --------
Total labor                            $16.91       $1.0909

All material was furnished by the railway company, the contractor
furnishing labor only; his contract price for this was $1 per cu. yd.

~TRACK ELEVATION, ALLEGHENY, PA.~--The wall was 6,100 ft. long and 75 per
cent. was on curves. The first wall built had a top width of 2½ ft. and
a bottom width of 0.4 the height with the back on a smooth batter. Later
the back was stepped and last the wall was proportioned as follows:
Calling the height from top of foundation to under coping, then width of
base was 0.45 (h + 3), the top measuring 2½ ft. The back was arranged
in steps 24 ins., 30 ins. and 36 ins. high, and the thickness of wall at
each step was, calling h equal to height of step from base, 0.45 (h + 3).
Several forms of expansion joints were tried. The first was tarred
paper extending through the wall every 50 ft.; the second was ½-in.
boards running through the wall every 50 ft.; the third was ½-in. board
extending 2 ft. into the wall, with a ¼-in. cove at the angles, every 25
ft. The third construction gave perfect satisfaction.

A 1-2-5 natural cement and a 1-3-6 Portland cement concrete mixed fairly
wet were used. The concrete was laid in 8-in. courses and faced with a
1-2 mortar. The forms were 2-in. white pine faced and jack planed on the
edges; upon removal of the forms board marks and other defects were
removed and a wash of neat cement was applied. One contractor used hand
mixing. The sand and gravel were measured in wheelbarrows and wheeled
onto the platform; the sand and cement were spread in thin layers, one
over the other, and thoroughly mixed dry; the gravel was then spread
over the mixture, the whole was shoveled into barrows or the pit again
shoveled into place and rammed. The other contractor used a cubical
mixer. A charging box holding 1¼ cu. yds. and graduated to show the
correct proportions of sand and gravel was filled by shoveling; cement
was placed on top and the box hoisted and dumped into the mixer. A
barrel holding the correct amount of water was emptied into the mixer
which was turned 10 or 15 times and discharged into cars. The costs of
mixing by hand and by machine were as follows:

Hand mixing.                               Total.      Per cu. yd.
½ foreman at $3                           $ 1.50        $0.025
3 men wheeling barrows at $1.50             4.50         0.075
10 men wheeling materials at $1.50         15.00         0.250
3 men mixing sand and gravel at $1.50       4.50         0.075
6 men mixing concrete at $1.50              9.00         0.150
1 man sprinkling at $1.50                   1.50         0.025
                                          ------        ------
Total                                     $36.00        $0.600

The output of the hand mixing gang was 60 cu. yds. per day.

Machine mixing.                            Total.      Per cu. yd.
1 foreman at $3.50                        $ 3.50        $0.035
1 stationary engineer at $3                 3.00         0.030
½ foreman at $1.75                          0.87         0.009
15 men loading charging bucket at $1.50    22.50         0.225
2 men dumping charging bucket at $1.75      3.50         0.035
2 tagmen at $2, ½ time                      2.00         0.020
1 man at trap at $2, ½ time                 1.00         0.010
                                          ------        ------
Total                                     $36.37        $0.364

The output of the cubical mixer was 100 cu. yds. per day.

The costs of placing concrete in the forms above the foundation by hand
below 12 ft., and by cars and derricks any height, were as follows:

By hand (barrows) below 12 ft.              Total.      Per cu. yd.
4 men loading concrete at $1.50            $ 6.00        $0.100
1 foreman ½ time at $3                       1.50         0.025
10 men wheeling at $1.50                    15.00         0.250
1 man scraping barrows at $1.50              1.50         0.025
2 men placing concrete at $1.50              3.00         0.050
1 man placing mortar face at $1.50           1.50         0.025
2 men mixing and carrying mortar at $1.50    3.00         0.050
                                           ------        ------
Total                                      $31.50        $0.525

By cars and derricks--
1 horse and driver at $3                   $ 3.00        $0.030
2 men dumping concrete ½ time at $1.50       1.50         0.015
1 fireman ½ time at $1.75                    0.88         0.009
3 tagmen at $1.50                            4.50         0.045
8 men placing and ramming conc. at $1.50    12.00         0.120
2 men mixing mortar at $1.50                 3.00         0.030
2 men placing mortar at $1.50                3.00         0.030
2 men carrying mortar at $1.50               3.00         0.030
1 foreman at $3                              3.00         0.030
1 stationary engineer at $3                  3.00         0.030
2 men attending hook at $1.50                3.00         0.030
                                           ------        ------
Total                                      $39.88        $0.399

The costs of placing concrete in the foundations were as follows:

By hand--                                   Total.      Per cu. yd.
1 foreman ½ time at $3                     $ 1.50        $0.025
4 men shoveling concrete at $1.50            6.00         0.100
1 man placing concrete at $1.50              1.50         0.025
1 man ramming concrete at $1.50              1.50         0.025
                                           ------        ------
Total                                      $10.50        $0.175

By machine--
1 horse and driver at $3                   $ 3.00        $0.030
3 men pushing and unloading car at $1.50     4.50         0.045
5 men placing and ramming at $1.50           7.50         0.075
1 foreman at $3                              3.00         0.030
2 men dumping mixer at $1.50                 3.00         0.030
                                           ------        ------
Total                                      $21.00        $0.210

~COST OF RETAINING WALL.~--The following figures of the cost of a concrete
retaining wall are given by C. C. Williams:

                    Cost of Material.
                                                Unit
Kind and amount of material--                   Price.   Cost.
Stone, 441 tons                                $ .70    $308.70
Sand, 182.5 yds.                                 .55     100.37
Cement, 536 bbls.                                .85     453.60
                                                        -------
      Total                                             $862.67

Lumber ¾ value                                          $205.33
Wheelbarrows, ¾ value, 6 at $3.50                         15.75
                                                        -------
      Total                                             $221.08

Excavation--
Labor, 4,002 hours at 15 cts.                           $600.30
Carts, 800 hours at 12½ cts.                             100.00
Foreman, 460 hours at 35 cts.                            171.00
Waterboy, 240 hours at 10 cts.                            24.00
                                                        -------
      Total                                             $895.30

Concrete--
Labor, 2,398 hours at 15 cts.                           $359.70
Foreman, 224 hours at 35 cts.                             77.40
                                                        -------
      Total                                             $437.10

Handling material--
Unloading cars, 380 hours at 15 cts.                    $ 57.00
Foreman, 40 hours at 35 cts.                              14.00
                                                        -------

      Total                                             $ 71.00

Forms--
Carpenters, 997 hours at 22½ cts.                       $224.33

Work to support bridge--
Carpenters, 542 hours at 22½ cts.                       $121.95
Labor, 458 hours at 15 cts.                               68.70
                                                        -------

      Total                                             $190.65

Superintendence and office--
Superintendent, 30 hours at 50 cts.                      $15.00
Office                                                    20.00
                                                       --------
      Total                                              $35.00
                                                       --------
            Grand total                               $2,937.13


Proportional costs--
                                         Cost Per       Per Cent.
                                         Yard of        of Total
Item.                           Cost.    Concrete.      Cost.
Concrete materials           $ 862.67      $2.02        46.7
Laying concrete                437.10       1.03        23.4
Lumber                         205.33        .48        11.3
Building forms                 224.33        .53        12.3
Handling material               71.00        .17        03.8
Wheelbarrows                    15.75        .04        01.0
Supt., etc.                     35.00        .07        01.5
                            ---------      -----      ------
Total                       $1,851.18      $4.34       100.00
Work on bridge                 190.65
Excavation                     895.30
                            ---------
                            $2,937.13




CHAPTER XIV.

METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING CONCRETE FOUNDATIONS FOR PAVEMENTS.


Contractor's skill or want of skill in systematizing and managing labor
counts as high in street work as in any class of concrete construction.
As previously demonstrated, the cost of mixing is a very small portion
of the labor cost of concrete in place; the costs of getting the
materials to the mixer and the mixed concrete to the work are the big
items, and in street work the opportunity for increasing the cost of
these items through mismanagement is magnified by the large area of
operations involved per cubic yard of concrete placed. One cubic yard of
concrete makes 6 sq. yds. of 6-in. pavement foundations and 100 cu. yds.
of concrete make a 6-in. foundation for 300 ft. of 30-ft. street, while
4 to 5 cu. yds. will build 100 ft. of ordinary curb and gutter. Thus the
haulage per cubic yard is considerable at best, and lack of plan in
distributing stock piles and handling the concrete can easily result in
such increased haulage expenses as to change a possible profit into a
certain loss. A little thought and skill in planning street work pays a
good profit.

~MIXTURES EMPLOYED.~--A comparatively lean concrete will serve for
pavement foundations; mixtures of 1-4-8 Portland cement or 1-2-5 natural
cement are amply good and it is folly, ordinarily, to employ richer
mixtures. Until recently, natural cement has been used almost
exclusively; a 1-2-5 natural cement mixture requires about 1.15 bbls. of
cement per cubic yard of concrete. A 1-4-8 Portland cement mixture
requires about 0.7 bbl. of cement per cubic yard. In the opinion of the
authors a considerably leaner mixture of Portland concrete is
sufficiently good when it is well mixed in machine mixers--for a 6-in.,
foundation 0.5 bbl. per cu. yd. The mixtures actually employed are
proportioned about as stated and their cost, or that of any other common
mixture, may easily be computed from Tables XII and XIII, giving for
different mixtures the quantities of cement, sand and stone per cubic
yard of concrete; the product of these quantities and the local prices
of materials in the stock piles gives the cost. When the concrete is
mixed by hand the ordinary labor cost of foundations is 0.4 to 0.5 of a
10-hour day's wages per cubic yard of concrete; occasionally it may be
as low as 0.3 of a day's wages where two mixing gangs are worked side by
side under different foremen and with an exacting contractor. Data for
machine mixing are too few to permit a similar general statement for
machine work, but in one case coming under the authors' observation, the
cost figured out to a little less than 0.2 of a day's wages per cubic
yard.

~DISTRIBUTION OF STOCK PILES.~--Assuming a 30-ft. street and a 1-3-5
concrete laid 6 ins. thick, the quantities of concrete materials
required per lineal foot of street are: Cement 0.60 bbl., sand 0.27 cu.
yd., stone 0.44 cu. yd. The stock piles should be so distributed that
each supplies enough materials for a section of foundation reaching half
way to the next adjacent stock pile on each side, and they should not
contain more or less material, otherwise a surplus remains to be cleaned
up or a deficiency to be supplied by borrowing from another pile. A
little care will ensure the proper distribution and it is well paid for
in money saved by not rehandling surplus or borrowed materials. For a
given mixture and a given width and thickness of foundation, the sizes
of the stock piles are determined by their distance apart and this will
depend upon whether hand or machine mixing is employed and upon the
means adopted for hauling the raw materials and the mixed concrete. It
is worth while always in stock piles of any size, to lay a flooring of
plank particularly under the stone pile; if dumped directly on the
ground it costs half as much again to handle stone. Current practice
warrants everything from a continuous bank, to piles from 1,000 to 1,500
ft. apart, in the spacing of stock piles.

~HINTS ON HAND MIXING.~--All but a small percentage of the concrete
annually laid in street work is hand mixed. The authors are confident
that this condition will disappear as contractors learn more of the
advantages of machine mixing, but it prevails at present. The general
economics of hand mixing are discussed in Chapter II; in street work as
before stated, the big items of labor cost are the costs of handling
materials and the data in Chapter II on these processes deserve special
attention. It is particularly worth noting that it is seldom economical
to handle materials in shovels where carrying is necessary; it is a
common thing in street work to see an attempt to get the stock piles so
close to the mixing board that the material can be handled with shovels,
and this is nearly always an economic error. Street work is readily
measured; in fact, its progress can be seen at a glance, and advantage
can often be taken of this fact to profit by the rivalry of separate
gangs. The authors have known of the labor costs being reduced as much
as 25 per cent., due to pitting one gang against another where each
could see the progress made by the other.

~METHODS OF MACHINE MIXING.~--Concrete mixers have been slow to replace
handwork in laying pavement foundations. In explanation of this fact it
is asserted: (1) That frequent shifting of the mixer causes too much
lost time, and (2) that the principal item of labor cost in street work
is the conveying of materials to and from the mixer, and this item is
the same whether hand or machine mixing be employed. The records of
machine mixer work given elsewhere in this chapter go far, in the
opinion of the authors, toward disproving the accuracy of both
assertions. If the machine used and the methods of work employed are
adapted to the conditions of street work, machine mixing can be employed
to decided advantage.

A continuous and large output is demanded in a mixer for street work;
the perfection of the mixing is within limits a minor consideration.
This at once admits for consideration types of mixers whose product is
classed as unsuitable for reinforced concrete work, and also admits of
speeding up the output of the better types to a point beyond that at
which they turn out their most perfect product. Keeping these facts in
mind either of the following two systems of work may be employed: (1)
Traction plants which travel with the work and deposit concrete in
place, or so nearly in place that little shoveling is necessary; (2)
portable plants which are set up at wide intervals along the work and
which discharge the concrete into carts or dump wagons which distribute
it to the work.

The secret of economic work with plants of the class cited first is the
distribution of the stock piles so as practically to eliminate haulage
from stock pile to mixer. The mixer backs away from the work, its
discharge end being toward the work and its charging end away from it.
Then deposit the materials so as to form a continuous stock pile along
the center of the street; the mixer moving backward from the completed
foundation keeps close to the materials and if the latter are uniformly
distributed in the pile the great bulk of the charging is done by
shoveling direct into the charging bucket. The point to be watched here
is that the shovelers do not have to carry the materials; separate stock
piles within moderate hauling distance by wheelbarrows are a far more
economic arrangement than a continuous pile so irregularly distributed
that much of the material has to be carried even a few paces in shovels.

Economic work with plants of the second class depends upon efficient and
adequate means of hauling the mixed concrete to the work. The plant
should not be shifted oftener than once in 1,000 to 2,000 ft., or, say,
four city blocks. This does away with the possibility of wheelbarrow
haulage; large capacity hand or horse carts must be employed. With 6 cu.
ft. hand carts, such as the Ransome cart, a haul of 500 ft. each way
from the mixer is possible and with horse carts, such as the Briggs,
this economic distance is increased to 1,000 ft. each way from the
mixer. The mixer must be close to the stock pile and it will pay to make
use of improved charging devices. A 6-in. foundation for 2,000 ft. of
30-ft. street calls for 667 cu. yds. of concrete, and if both sides are
curbed at the same time, 100 cu. yds. more are added, or 767 cu. yds. in
all; where intersecting streets are to be paved in both directions from
the mixer plant these amounts are doubled. A very small saving per cubic
yard due to mechanical handling of the materials to the mixer amounts to
the interest on a considerable investment in such plant. A point that
should not be forgotten is that carts such as those named above spread
the concrete in dumping so that little or no shoveling is required.

~FOUNDATION FOR STONE BLOCK PAVEMENT, NEW YORK, N. Y.~--Mr. G. W. Tillson,
in "Street Pavements and Paving Materials," p. 204, gives the following
data on the cost of granite block pavement in New York City in 1899. The
day was 10 hours long:

                                         Per         Per         Per
Concrete gang--                          day.     sq. yd.     cu. yd.
1 foreman                              $ 3.00     $0.0125      $0.075
8 mixers on two boards, at $1.25        10.00      0.0416       0.250
4 wheeling stone and sand, at $1.25.     5.00      0.0208       0.125
1 carrying cement and supplying
water, at $1.25                          1.25      0.0051       0.031
1 ramming, at $1.25                      1.25      0.0051       0.031
                                       ------     -------      ------
Total, 240 sq. yds. (40 cu. yds.).     $20.50     $0.0851      $0.512

The concrete was shoveled direct from the mixing boards to place.

Cost 1-2-4 concrete--                                     Per cu. yd.
1-1/3 bbls. natural cement, at $0.90                            $1.20
0.95 cu. yd. stone, at $1.25                                     1.19
0.37 cu. yd. sand, at $1.00                                      0.37
Labor                                                            0.51
                                                                -----
                                                                $3.27

In laying 5,167 sq. yds. of granite block pavement on one job in New
York City in 1905, the authors' records show that one laborer mixed and
laid 1.3 cu. yds. of concrete per day in a 6-in. foundation; this is a
very small output. The work was done by contract and the labor cost was
as follows:

                                                       Per      Per
Item.                                       Total.   sq. yd.  cu. yd.
28½ days foreman at $3.50                 $ 99.75    $0.0193   $0.118
399 days laborers at $1.75                 698.25     0.1351    0.826
                                          -------    -------   ------
                                          $798.00    $0.1544   $0.944

The average day's wages was $1.86, so that the labor cost was about 0.5
of a day's wages per cubic yard of concrete.

~FOUNDATION FOR PAVEMENT, NEW ORLEANS. LA.~--Mr. Alfred E. Harley states
that in laying concrete foundations for street pavement in New Orleans,
a day's work, in running three mixing boards, covering the full width
of the street, averaged 900 sq. yds., 6 ins. thick, or 150 cu. yds.,
with a gang of 40 men. With wages assumed to be 15 cts. per hour the
labor cost was:

                                          Cts. per cu. yd.
6 men wheeling broken stone                       6
3 men wheeling sand                               3
1 man wheeling cement                             1
2 men opening cement                              2
7 men dry mixing                                  7
8 men taking concrete off                         8
3 men tamping                                     3
3 men grading concrete                            3
1 man attending run planks                        1
3 water boys                                      1
2 extra men and 1 foreman                         4
                                                 --
Total labor cost                                 39 cts.

~FOUNDATIONS FOR STREET PAVEMENT, TORONTO, CANADA.~--The following cost of
a concrete base for pavements at Toronto has been abstracted from a
report (1892) of the City Engineer, Mr. Granville C. Cunningham. The
concrete was 1-2½-7½ Portland; 2,430 cu. yds. were laid, the thickness
being 6 ins., at the following cost per cubic yard:

0.77 bbl. cement, at $2.78                     $2.14
0.76 cu. yd. stone, at $1.91                    1.45
0.27 cu. yd. sand and gravel, at $0.80          0.22
Labor (15 cts. per hr)                          1.03
                                               -----
Total                                          $4.84

Judging by the low percentage of stone in so lean a mixture as the
above, the concrete was not fully 6 ins. thick as assumed by Mr.
Cunningham. Note that the labor cost was 1½ to 2 times what it would
have been under a good contractor.

~MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES OF PAVEMENT FOUNDATION WORK.~--The following
records of pavement foundation work are taken from the note and time
books of one of the authors:

_Case 1._--Laying 6-in. pavement foundation; stone delivered and dumped
upon 2-in. plank laid to receive it. Sand and stone were dumped along
the street, so that the haul in wheelbarrows to mixing board Was about
40 ft. Two gangs of men worked under separate foremen, and each gang
averaged 4.5 cu. yds. concrete per hour. The labor cost was as follows
for 45 cu. yds. per gang:


                                                  Per day.      Per cu. yd.
4 men filling barrows with stone and sand
ready for the mixers, wages 15 cts.
per hour                                            $6.00         $0.13
10 men, wheeling, mixing and shoveling to
place (3 or 4 steps), wages 15 cts. per
hour                                                15.00          0.33

2 men ramming, wages 15 cts. per hour                3.00          0.07
1 foreman at 30 cts. per hour and 1 water
boy, 5 cts                                           3.50          0.08
                                                    -----         -----
Total                                               $27.50        $0.61

_Case II._--Sometimes it is desirable to know every minute detail cost,
for which purpose the following is given:

                                                  ----Per cu. yd.----
                                                  Day's labor.  Cost.
3 men loading stones into barrows                     $0.06     $0.09
1 man loading sand into barrows                        0.02      0.03
2 men ramming                                          0.04      0.06
1 foreman and 1 water boy equivalent to                0.035     0.05
Wheeling sand and cement to mixing board               0.02      0.03
Wheeling stone to mixing board                        0.026      0.04
9 men mixing mortar                                   0.013      0.02
Mixing stone and mortar                               0.049      0.07
Placing concrete (walking 15 ft.)                     0.072      0.11
                                                     ------     -----
Total                                                $0.335     $0.50

In one respect this is not a perfectly fair example (although it
represents ordinary practice), for the mortar was only turned over once
in mixing instead of three times, and the stone was turned only twice
instead of three or four times. Water was used in great abundance, and
by its puddling action probably secured a very fair mixture of cement
and sand, and in that way secured a better mixture than would be
expected from the small amount of labor expended in actual mixing.
About 9 cts. more per cu. yd. spent in mixing would have secured a
perfect concrete without trusting to the water.

_Case III._--Two gangs (34 men) working under separate foremen averaged
600 sq. yds., or 100 cu. yds. of concrete per 10-hour day for a season.
This is equivalent to 3 cu. yds. per man per day. The stone and sand
were wheeled to the mixing board in barrows, mixed and shoveled to
place. Each gang was organized as follows:

                                 Per day.       Per cu. yd.
4 men loading barrows            $ 6.00          $0.12
9 men mixing and placing          13.50           0.27
2 men tamping                      3.00           0.06
1 foreman                          2.50           0.05
                                 ------          -----
Total                            $25.00          $0.50

These men worked with great rapidity. The above cost of 50 cts. per cu.
yd. is about as low as any contractor can reasonably expect to mix and
place concrete by hand in pavement work.

_Case IV._--Two gangs of men, 34 in all, working side by side on
separate mixing boards, averaged 720 sq. yds., or 120 cu. yds., per
10-hour day. Each gang was organized as follows:

                                 Per day.       Per cu. yd.
6 men loading and wheeling        $ 9.00          $0.15
8 men mixing and placing           12.00           0.20
2 men tamping                       3.00           0.05
1 foreman                           3.00           0.05
                                  ------          -----
Total                             $27.00          $0.45

Instead of shoveling the concrete from the mixing board into place, the
mixers loaded it into barrows and wheeled it to place. The men worked
with great rapidity.

Mr. Irving E. Howe gives the cost of a 6-in. foundation of 1-3-5 natural
cement at Minneapolis, Minn., in 1897, as $2.80 per cu. yd., or $0.467
per sq. yd. Cement cost 76 cts. per barrel and stone and sand cost
delivered $1.15 and 30 cts. respectively. Mixers received $1.75 per
day.

Mr. Niles Meriwether gives the cost of materials and labor for an 8-in.
foundation constructed by day labor (probably colored) at Memphis,
Tenn., in 1893, as follows:

                                        Per sq. yd.
Natural cement at $0.74 per bbl              $0.195
Sand at $1.25 per cu. yd                      0.075
Stone at $1.87 per cu. yd                     0.355
Labor mixing and placing                      0.155
                                              -----
Total                                        $0.780

Labor was paid $1.25 to $1.50 per 8-hour day and 1.16 bbls. of cement
were used per cubic yard of concrete. The cost of materials, as will be
noted, was high and the labor seems to have been inefficient.

~FOUNDATIONS FOR BRICK PAVEMENT, CHAMPAIGN, ILL.~--The concrete foundation
for a brick pavement constructed in 1903 was 6 ins. thick; the concrete
used was composed of 1 part natural cement, 3 parts of sand and gravel,
and 3 parts of broken stone. All the materials were mixed with shovels,
and were thrown into place from the board upon which the mixing was
done. The material was brought to the steel mixing board in wheelbarrows
from piles where it had been placed in the middle of the street, the
length of haul being usually from 30 to 60 ft. The foundation was 6 ins.
thick and it cost as follows for materials and labor:

                                            Cost per
                                             cu. yd.
1.2 bbls. cement, at $0.50                    $0.600
0.6 cu. yd. sand and gravel, at $1             0.600
0.6 cu. yd. broken stone, at $1.40             0.840
6 men turning with shovels, at $2              0.080
4 men throwing into place, at $2               0.053
2 men handling cement, at $1.75                0.023
1 man wetting with hose, at $1.75              0.012
2 men tamping, at $1.75                        0.023
1 man leveling, at $1.75                       0.012
6 men wheeling stone, at $1.75                 0.070
4 men wheeling gravel, at $1.75                0.047
1 foreman, at $4                               0.027
                                              ------
                                              $2.387

This is practically 40 cts. per sq. yd., or $2.40 per cu. yd. of
concrete for materials and labor. It is evident from the above
quantities that a cement barrel was assumed to hold about 4.5 cu. ft.,
hence the cement was measured loose in making the 1-3-3 concrete. The
accuracy of the quantities given is open to serious doubt. It will also
be noted that the labor cost of making and placing the concrete was only
35 cts. per cu. yd., wages being nearly $1.85 per day. This is so
remarkably low that some mistake would seem to have been made in the
measurement of the work. The authors do not hesitate to say that no gang
of men ever made any considerable amount of concrete by hand at the rate
of 5.75 cu. yds. per man per day.

[Illustration: Fig. 112.--Foote Continuous Mixer Arranged for Pavement
Foundation Work.]

~FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION USING CONTINUOUS MIXERS.~--The following are
records of two jobs of pavement foundation work using continuous mixers
with one-horse concrete carts in one instance and wheelbarrows in the
other instance. The mixer used was the Foote mixer, as arranged for the
work being described it is shown by Fig. 112. One particular advantage
of this and similar mixers for street work is that no proportioning or
measuring of the materials is required of the men. The mixers are
provided with an automatic measuring device, by means of which any
desired proportion of cement, sand and stone is delivered to the mixing
trough. The mixer is mounted on trucks, and the hoppers that receive
the sand and stone are comparatively low down. The sand can be wheeled
in barrows up a run plank and dumped into a hopper on one side of the
mixer, and in like manner the gravel or broken stone can be delivered
into a hopper on the other side. The cement is delivered in bags or
buckets to a man who dumps it into a cement hopper directly over the
mixer. All that the operator needs to attend to is to see that the men
keep the hoppers comparatively full. The records of work on the two jobs
mentioned are as follows:

[Illustration: Fig: 113.--Briggs Cart Distributing Concrete for Pavement
Foundation.]

_Job I._--The sand was delivered from the stock pile by a team hitched
to a drag scraper, and was dumped alongside the mixer where two men
shoveled it into the hopper. On the same job the concrete was hauled
away from the mixer in Briggs' concrete carts. With a gang of 30 men and
2 to 4 horses hauling concrete in Briggs' carts, the contractor averaged
1,200 sq. yds., or 200 cu. yds., per day of 10 hours. With wages of
laborers at 15 cts. per hour, and a single horse at the same rate, the
cost of labor was 26 cts. per cu. yd., or less than 4½ cts. per sq. yd.
of concrete base 6 ins. thick. The coal was a nominal item, and did not
add 1 ct. per cu. yd. to the cost. In this case the mixer was set up on
a side street and the concrete was hauled in the carts for a distance of
a block each way from the mixer. At first four carts were used, but as
the concreting approached the mixer, less hauling was required, and
finally only two carts were used. An illustration of a Briggs cart is
given by Fig. 113; it is hauled by one horse, which the driver leads,
and is dumped by an ingenious device operated from the horse's head. The
cart dumps from the bottom and spreads the load in a layer about 8 or 9
ins. thick, so that no greater amount of shoveling is necessary than
when barrows are used. It took about 20 seconds for the cart to back up
and get its load and about 5 seconds to dump and spread the load.

_Job II._--In this job the mixer was charged with wheelbarrows and
wheelbarrows were also employed to take the mixed concrete to the work,
the mixer being moved forward at frequent intervals. The stock piles
were continuous, sand on one side of the street and stone on the other
side. A 1-3-6 Portland cement concrete was used, a very rich mixture for
a 6-in. foundation. The organization of the working gang was as follows:

Men loading and wheeling gravel             8
Men assisting in loading gravel             2
Man dumping barrows into hopper             1
Men loading and wheeling sand               3
Man dumping barrows into hopper             1
Men wheeling concrete in barrows            7
Men spreading concrete                      3
Men tamping concrete                        2
Man pouring cement into hopper              1
Man operating mixer                         1
Man shoveling spilled concrete              1
Man opening cement bags                     1
Engineer                                    1
                                           --
Total men in gang                          32

The average day's output of this gang was 150 cu. yds., or 900 sq. yds.
in 8 hours; but on the best day's work the output was 200 cu. yds., or
1,200 sq. yds. in 8 hours, which is a remarkable record for 32 men and a
mixer working only 8 hours.

The following is the labor cost of 8,896 sq. yds. of 4½-in. concrete
foundation for an asphalt pavement constructed in New York City in 1904:

Item.                          Per sq yd.
Foreman at $3.75                 $0.030
Laborers at $1.50                 0.242
Teams at $5                       0.040
Steam engine at $3.50             0.028
                                 ------
Total                            $0.340

The concrete was a 1-3-6 mixture and was mixed in a Foote mixer. These
costs are compiled from data collected by the authors.

~FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION FOR STREET RAILWAY TRACK USING CONTINUOUS
MIXERS.~--The following account of the methods and cost of constructing a
concrete foundation for street railway track at St. Louis, Mo., is
compiled from information published by Mr. Richard McCulloch. The work
was done by day labor by the United Railways Co., in 1906. Figure 114
shows the concrete construction. A 1-2½-6½ Portland cement, broken stone
concrete mixed by machine was used.

[Illustration: Fig. 114.--Concrete Foundation for Street Railway Track.]

The material for the concrete was distributed on the street beside the
tracks in advance of the machine, the sand being first deposited, then
the crushed rock piled on that, and finally the cement sacks emptied on
top of this pile. The materials were shoveled from this pile into the
concrete mixing machine without any attempt at hand mixing on the
street. Great care was taken in the delivery of materials on the street
to have exactly the proper quantity of sand, rock and cement, so that
there would be enough for the ballasting of the track to the proper
height and that none would be left over. Each car was marked with its
capacity in cubic feet, and each receiver was furnished with a table by
which he could easily estimate the number of lineal feet of track over
which the load should be distributed.

The concrete mixing machines were designed and built in the shops of the
United Railways Co. Three machines were used in this work, one for each
gang. The machine is composed of a Drake continuous worm mixer, fed by a
chain dragging in a cast-iron trough. The trough is 36 ft. long, so that
there is room for 14 men to shovel into it. Water is sprayed into the
worm after the materials are mixed dry. This water was obtained from the
fire plugs along the route. In the first machine built, the Drake mixer
was 8 ft. long. In the two newer machines the mixer was 10 ft. long.
Both the conveyor and the mixer were motor driven, current being
obtained for this purpose from the trolley wire overhead. Two types of
machines were used, one in which the conveyor trough was straight and 45
in. above the rail, and the other in which the conveyor trough was
lowered back of the mixer, being 25 in. above the rail. The latter type
had the advantage of not requiring such a lift in shoveling, but the
trough is so low that a motor truck cannot be placed underneath it. In
the high machine the mixer is moved forward by a standard motor truck
under the conveyor. In the low machine the mixer is moved by a ratchet
and gear on the truck underneath the mixer. A crew of 27 men is required
to work each machine, and under average conditions concrete for 80 lin.
ft. of single track, amounting to 22 cu. yds., can be discharged per
hour.

The costs of the concrete materials delivered per cubic yard of concrete
were: Cement, per barrel, $1.70; sand, per cu. yd., $0.675, and stone,
per cu. yd., $0.425. The cost of the concrete work per cubic yard and
per lineal foot of track was as follows:

Item.                        Per lin. ft.   Per cu. yd.
Concrete materials             $0.791         $2.92
Labor mixing and placing        0.071          0.26
                               ------         -----
Total labor and materials      $0.862         $3.18

~FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION USING BATCH MIXERS AND WAGON HAULAGE, ST. LOUIS,
MO.~--The following record of the method and cost of laying a concrete
foundation for street pavement using machine mixing and wagon haulage is
given by Mr. D. A. Fisher. The foundation was 6 ins. thick. The gravel
was dumped from wagons into a large hopper, raised by a bucket elevator
into bins, and drawn off through gates into receiving hoppers on the
charging platform where the cement was added. The receiving hoppers
discharged into the mixers, which discharged the mixed concrete into a
loading car that dumped into wagons, which delivered it on the street
where wanted. The longest haul in wagons was 30 mins., but careful tests
showed that the concrete had hardened well. The wagons were patent dump
wagons of the drop-bottom type. Mr. Fisher says:

"You may consider the following figures a fair average of the plant
referred to, working to its capacity. To these amounts, however, must be
added the interest on the investment, the cost of wrecking the plant and
the depreciation of the same, superintendence, and the pay roll that
must be maintained in wet weather. I am assuming the street as already
brought to grade and rolled.

"With labor at $1.75 per day of 10 hours, teams at $4, engineer and
foremen at $3, and engine at $5 per day, concrete mixed and put in place
by the above method costs:

                                        Per cu. yd.
To mix                               $0.12 to $0.15
To deliver to street                  0.10 to  0.14
To spread and tamp in place           0.08 to  0.11
                                     --------------
Total                                $0.30 to $0.40

"The mixers are No. 2½ Smith, sold by the Contractors' Supply Co.,
Chicago, Ill., and a ½ yd. cube, sold by Municipal Engineering &
Contracting Co., Chicago.

"The above figures are on the basis of a batch every 2 minutes, which is
easily maintained by using the loading car, as by this means there will
be no delay in the operation of the plant owing to the irregularity of
the arrival of the teams.

"My experience leads me to believe that a better efficiency can be
obtained by using mixers of 1 cu. yd. capacity, and that the batch
mixer is the only type of machine where any certainty of the proportion
of the mixture is realized."

[Illustration: Fig. 115.--Chicago Improved Cube Traction Mixer for
Pavement Foundation.]

~FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION USING A TRACTION MIXER.~--In laying a 6-in.
foundation for an asphalt pavement in Buffalo, N. Y., an average of 100
sq. yds., or 16.6 cu. yds., of concrete in place was made per hour using
the traction mixer shown by Fig. 115. This mixer was made by the
Municipal Engineering & Contracting Co., of Chicago, Ill., and consisted
of one of that company's improved cube mixers operated by a gasoline
engine and equipped with the regulation mechanical charging device and
also with a swinging conveyor to deliver the mixed concrete to the work.
The feature of the apparatus in its application to paving work is the
conveyor. This was 25 ft. long and pivoted at the mixer end so as to
swing through an arc of 170°. The mixer discharged into a skip or bucket
traveling on the conveyor frame and discharging over the end spreading
its load anywhere within a radius of 25 ft. In operation the mixer
traveled along the center of the street, backing away from the finished
foundation and toward the stock pile, which was continuous and was
deposited along the center of the street. The bulk of the sand and stone
was thus shoveled direct into the charging bucket and the remainder was
wheeled to the bucket in barrows. As the charging bucket is only 14 ins.
high the barrows could be dumped directly into it from the ground. The
gang worked was 17 including a foreman and one boy, and with this gang
100 sq. yds. of 6-in. foundation was laid per hour. Assuming an average
wage of 20 cts. an hour the cost of mixing and placing the foundation
concrete was 3.4 cts. per sq. yd. or 20.4 cts. per cu. yd. for labor
alone.

~FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION USING CONTINUOUS MIXER.~--The foundation was 6
ins. thick for an asphalt pavement and was laid in Chicago, Ill. The
concrete used was exceptionally rich for pavement foundation work, it
being a 1-3-6 Lehigh Portland cement, broken stone mixture. The mixing
was done by machine, a mixer made by the Buffalo Concrete Mixer Co.,
Buffalo, N. Y., being used. This mixer was equipped with an elevating
charging hopper and was operated as a continuous mixer. The mixer was
mounted on wheels and was pulled along the center of the street ahead of
the work with its discharge end toward the work. Moves of about 25 to 30
ft. were made, the mixer being pulled ahead for this distance each time
that the concrete came up to its discharge end. The stock piles were
continuous, sand on one side and stone on the other side of the street.
Cement was stored in a pile at each end of the block. All materials were
wheeled from stock piles to mixer in wheelbarrows. The men wheeling sand
and stone loaded their own barrows, wheeled them to the mixer and
discharged them directly into the elevating hopper. No runways were
used, the barrows being wheeled directly on the ground. The cement was
brought in barrows, two or three bags being a load, and dumped alongside
a cement box which was located close to and at one side of the elevating
hopper. A man untied the bags and emptied them into the cement box and
another man scooped the cement out of the box in bucketfuls and emptied
it over the sand and stone in the elevating hopper. The mixer discharged
onto a sheet iron shoveling board, and the concrete was carried in
shovels from shoveling board to place, the length of carry being a
maximum of 25 to 30 ft. Two men were required to pull down the cone of
concrete at the discharge end of the mixer and to keep the stone from
separating and rolling down the sides. The gang was organized as
follows:

                                          No. Men.
Loading and wheeling stone                      10
Loading and wheeling sand                   3 to 4
Loading and wheeling cement                      2
Untieing and emptying cement bags                1
Charging cement to hopper                        1
Operating mixer and hopper                       1
Pulling down and tending discharge               2
Carrying concrete in shovels                     8
Spreading concrete                               2
Tamping concrete                                 2
Sweeping concrete                                1
General laborers                                 3
Foreman                                          1
Watchman                                         1
Timekeeper                                       1
                                                --
Total gang                                      40

This gang averaged 1,000 sq. yds. of 6-in. foundation per 10-hour day; a
maximum of 1,400 sq. yds. was laid in a day. We have thus an average of
167 cu. yds. and a maximum of 234 cu. yds. of concrete foundation mixed
and placed per 10-hour day. At an average wage of $2 per day the average
labor cost of mixing and placing concrete was 48 cts. per cu. yd. or 8
cts. per sq. yd. of 6-in. foundation. It was stated that the gang was
larger by three men than was ordinarily used owing to certain extra work
being done at the time that the above figures were collected. Taking out
three extra men and the timekeeper and watchman we get 34 men actually
working in mixing and placing concrete. This reduced gang gives us a
labor cost for mixing and placing of about 41 cts. per cu. yd. or 6.8
cts. per sq. yd. of 6-in. foundation.

~FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION USING A BATCH MIXER.~--The following figures are
an average of several jobs using a Ransome ½-cu. yd. mixer for
constructing 6-in. foundations. The mixer was moved 1,000 ft. at a time
and the work conducted 500 ft. in each direction from each station. The
concrete materials were delivered from stock pile to mixer in
wheelbarrows and the mixed concrete was hauled to the work in
two-wheeled Ransome carts. Run planks were laid for the carts and one
man readily pushed a cart holding 6 cu. ft. The men had to work fast on
the long haul but had an easy time when the haul was short. The
organization of the gang was as follows, wages being $1.50 per day:

10 men loading and wheeling stone          $15.00
4 men loading and wheeling sand              6.00
2 men handling cement                        3.00
1 fireman                                    2.00
1 man dumping mixer                          1.50
5 men wheeling carts                         7.50
3 men spreading and ramming                  4.50
1 foreman                                    3.50
                                           ------
Total wages per day                        $43.00

This gang averaged 1,080 sq. yds. of 6-in. foundation or 180 cu. yds. of
concrete in place per day which gives a labor cost of 24 cts per cu. yd.
or 4 cts. per sq. yd. for mixing and placing.




CHAPTER XV.

METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS, PAVEMENTS AND CURB AND
GUTTER.


Next to pavement foundations the most extensive use of concrete in
street work is for cement walks and concrete curb and gutter. Usually
the mixing and placing of the concrete is hand work, practically the
only exceptions being where pavement base, curbing and sidewalks are
built all at once, using machine mixers. The same objections that have
been raised to machine mixers in laying pavement foundation are raised
against them for curb and walk construction, and owing to the much
smaller yardage per lineal foot of street in walk and curb work these
objections carry more force than they do in case of paving work. Another
argument against the use of mixers is that both walk and curb and gutter
work involve the use of forms and the application of mortar finish, the
placing of which are really the limiting factors in the rate of progress
permissible, and this rate is too slow to consume an output necessary to
make a mixer plant economical as compared with hand mixing where so much
transportation is involved. Concrete sidewalk and curb work are
essentially hand mixing work; they, therefore, involve a careful study
of the economies of hand mixing and wheelbarrow haulage which are fully
discussed in Chapter II.


CEMENT SIDEWALKS.

Sidewalk construction consists in molding on a suitably prepared
sub-base a concrete slab from 3½ to 7½ ins. thick, depending on
practice, and finishing its top surface with a ½ to 1½-in. wearing
surface of cement mortar.

~GENERAL METHOD OF CONSTRUCTION.~--The excavation and preparation of the
sub-grade call for little notice beyond the warning that they should
never be neglected. The authors have seen many thousands of feet of
cement walk laid in the middle West in which the sub-base was placed
directly on the natural sod, often covered with grass and weeds a foot
high. Such practice is wholly vicious. The sod should always be removed
and the surface soil excavated to a depth depending upon the climate and
nature of the ground and the foundation bed well tamped. From 4 to 6
ins. depth of excavation will serve where the soil is reasonably hard
and there are no heavy frosts; with opposite conditions a 12-in.
excavation is none too deep. The thickness of the broken stone, gravel,
cinder or sand sub-base should likewise be varied with the character of
the soil, the conditions of natural drainage and the prevalence of
frost. In well drained sandy soils 6 to 8 ins. of sub-base are
sufficient, but in clayey soils with poor natural drainage the sub-base
should be from 10 to 12 ins. thick at least; the local conditions will
determine the thickness of sub-base necessary and in places it may be
desirable to provide by artificial drainage against the accumulation of
water under the concrete. Tile drains are better and cheaper than
excessively deep foundations. The thorough tamping of the sub-base is
essential to avoid settling and subsequent cracking of the concrete
slab. This is a part of sidewalk work which is often neglected.

Portland cement concrete, sand and broken stone or gravel mixtures in
the proportions of 1-3-5 and 1-3-6 are used for base slabs. For walks up
to 7 ft. wide the slab is made 3½ ins. thick for residence streets and
4½ to 5 ins. thick for business streets; for wider walks the thickness
is increased to 7 ins. for 8-ft. width and 7½ ins. for 9 to 10-ft.
width. Roughly the thickness of the walk in inches (base and top
together) is made about equal to its width in feet. The concrete is
deposited in a single layer and tamped thoroughly, either in separate
blocks behind suitable forms or in a continuous slab which is while
fresh cut through to make separate blocks. For walks up to 8 ft. wide
the slab is divided by transverse joints spaced about the width of the
walk apart, but for the wider walks the safety of this division depends
upon the thickness of the base; an 8-ft. walk with a 5-in. base can
safely be laid with joints 8 ft. apart, but if the slab is only 4 ins.
thick it had better be laid in 4×4-ft. squares. The mode of procedure in
base construction is as follows:

The sub-base being laid, side forms held by stakes are placed as shown
by Fig. 116, with the top edges of the boards exactly to the grade of
the top surface of the finished walk. The concrete is then deposited
between these side forms and tamped until it is brought up to the level
marked by the templet A. If the plan is to deposit the base in
sections transverse plates of 3/8 to ¼ in. steel are set across the walk
between the side boards at proper intervals and the concrete tamped
behind them; sometimes the concreting is done in alternate blocks. When
the steel plate is withdrawn an open joint is left for expansion and
contraction. Where the plan is to lay the base in one piece which is
afterwards cut into blocks, the cutting is done with a spade or cleaver.

[Illustration: Fig. 116.--Sketch Showing Method of Constructing Cement
Walks.]

[Illustration: Fig. 117.--"Jointer" for Cement Sidewalk Work.]

Portland cement mortar mixed 1 to 1½ to 1 to 2 is used for the wearing
surface, and is laid from ½ in. to 1½ ins. thick, depending upon the
width of the walk and the thickness of the base. As a rule the mortar is
mixed rather stiff; it is placed with trowels in one coat usually, but
sometimes in two coats, and less often by tamping. The mortar coat is
brought up flush with the top edges of the side forms by means of the
templet B, and the top finished by floating and troweling. The
wearing coat is next divided into sections corresponding with the
sections into which the base is divided, by cutting through it with a
trowel guided by a straight edge and then rounding the edges of the cut
with a special tool called a jointer and shown by Fig. 117. An edger,
Fig. 118, is then run around the outside edges of the block to round
them. The laying of the mortar surface must always follow closely the
laying of the base so that the two will set together.

[Illustration: Fig. 118.--"Edger" for Cement Sidewalk Work.]

~BONDING OF WEARING SURFACE AND BASE.~--Trouble in securing a perfect bond
between the wearing surface and the base usually comes from one or more
of the following causes: (1) Applying the surface after the base
concrete has set. While several means are available for bonding fresh to
old concrete as described in Chapter XXIV, the better practice is not to
resort to them except in case of necessity but to follow so close with
the surfacing that the base will not have had time to take initial set.
(2) Poor mixing and tamping of this base concrete. (3) Use of clayey
gravel or an accumulation of dirt on the surface. In tamping clayey
gravel the water flushes the clay to the surface and prevents the best
bond. (4) Poor troweling, that is failure to press and work the mortar
coat into the base concrete. Some contractors advocate tamping the
mortar coat to obviate this danger. Conversely, to make the surface coat
adhere firmly to the base it must be placed before the base concrete has
set; the base concrete must be thoroughly cleaned or kept clean from
surface dirt; the surface coat must be tamped or troweled forcibly into
the base concrete so as to press out all air and the film of water which
collects on top of the concrete base.

~PROTECTION OF WORK FROM SUN AND FROST.~--Sun and frost cause scaling and
hair cracks. For work in freezing weather the water, sand and gravel
should be heated or salt used to retard freezing until the walk can be
finished; it may then be protected from further action of the frost by
covering it first with paper and then with a mattress of sawdust,
shavings or sand and covering the whole with a tarpaulin. Methods of
heating concrete materials and rules for compounding salt solutions are
given in Chapter VII. The danger from sun arises from the too rapid
drying out of the surface coating; the task then is to hold the moisture
in the work until the mixture has completely hardened. Portable frames
composed of tarpaulin stretched over 2×4-in. strips may be laid over the
finished walk to protect it from the direct rays of the sun; these
frames can be readily removed to permit sprinkling. Practice varies in
the matter of sprinkling, but it is the safe practice in hot weather to
sprinkle frequently for several days. Moisture is absolutely necessary
to the perfect hardening of cement work and a surplus is always better
than a scarcity. In California the common practise is to cover the
cement walk, as soon as it has hardened, with earth which is left on for
several days.

~CAUSE AND PREVENTION OF CRACKS.~--Cracks in cement walks are of two
kinds, fractures caused by any one of several construction faults and
which reach through the surface coating or through both surface and
base, and hair cracks which are simply skin fractures. Large cracks are
the result of constructive faults and one of the most common of these is
poor foundation construction; other causes are poor mixing and tamping
of the base, too large blocks for thickness of the work, failure to cut
joints through work. Hair cracks are the result of flushing the neat
cement to the surface by excessive troweling or the use of too wet a
mixture. The prevention of cracks obviously lies in seeing that the
construction faults cited do not exist. If expansion joints are not
provided, a long stretch of cement walk will expand on a hot day and
bulge up at some point of weakness breaking the walk.

~COST OF CEMENT WALKS.~--The cost of cement walks is commonly estimated in
cents per square foot, including the necessary excavation and the cinder
or gravel foundation. The excavation usually costs about 13 cts. per
cu. yd., and if the earth is loaded into wagons the loading costs
another 10 cts. per cu. yd., wages being 15 cts. per hr. The cost of
carting depends upon the length of haul, and may be estimated from data
given in Chapter III. If the total cost of excavation is 27 cts. per cu.
yd., and if the excavation is 12 ins. deep, we have a cost of 1 ct. per
sq. ft. for excavation alone. Usually the excavation is not so deep, and
often the earth from the excavation can be sold for filling lots.

In estimating the quantity of cement required for walks, it is well to
remember that 100 sq. ft. of walk 1 in. thick require practically 0.3
cu. yd. concrete. If the concrete base is 3 ins. thick, we have 0.3 × 3,
or 0.9 cu. yd. per 100 sq. ft. of walk. And by using the tables in
Chapter II we can estimate the quantity of cement required for any given
mixture. In cement walk work the cement is commonly measured loose, so
that a barrel can be assumed to hold 4.5 cu. ft. of cement. If the
barrel is assumed to hold 4.5 cu. ft., it will take less than 1 bbl. of
cement to make 1 cu. yd. of 1-3-6 concrete; hence it will not require
more than 0.9 bbl. cement, 0.9 cu. yd. stone, and 0.45 cu. yd. sand per
100 sq. ft. of 3-in. concrete base. The 1-in. wearing coat made of 1-1½
mortar requires about 3 bbls. of cement per cu. yd., if the barrel is
assumed to hold 4.5 cu. ft., and since it takes 0.3 cu. yd. per 100 sq.
ft., 1 in. thick, we have 0.3 × 3, or 0.9 bbl. cement per 100 sq. ft.
for the top coat. This makes a total of 1.8 bbls. per 100 sq. ft., or 1
bbl. makes 55 sq. ft. of 4-in. walk.

As the average of a number of small jobs, the authors' records show the
following costs per sq. ft. of 4-in. walk such as just described:

                                                     Cts. per sq. ft.

Excavating 8 ins. deep                                           0.65
Gravel for 4-in. foundation, at $1.00 per cu. yd.                1.20
0.018 bbl. cement, at $2.00                                      3.60
0.009 cu. yd. broken stone, at $1.50                             1.35
0.006 cu. yd. sand, at $1.00                                     0.60
Labor making walk                                                1.60
                                                                 ----
Total cents                                                      9.00

This is 9 cts. per sq. ft. of finished walk. The gangs that built the
walk were usually two masons at $2.50 each per 10-hr. day with two
laborers at $1.50 each. Such a gang averaged 500 sq. ft. of walk per
day.

~Cost at Toronto, Ont.~--Mr. C. H. Rust, City Engineer, Toronto, Ont.,
gives the following costs of constructing concrete sidewalks by day
labor. The sidewalks have a 4-in. foundation of coarse gravel or soft
coal cinders, thoroughly consolidated by tamping or rolling, upon which
is placed a 3½-in. layer of concrete composed of 1 part Portland cement,
2 parts clean, sharp, coarse sand, and 5 parts of approved furnace slag,
broken stone or screened gravel. The wearing surface is 1 in. thick, or
1 part Portland cement, 1 part clean, sharp, coarse sand, and 3 parts
screened pea gravel, crushed granite, quartzite or hard limestone. Costs
are given of a 6-ft. and a 4-ft. walk as follows:

COST OF 6 FT. SIDEWALK.
                                        Per 100
Item.                                   sq. ft.
Labor                                   $ 5.59
Cement, 1.66 bbls., at $1.54              2.49
Gravel, 2.7 cu. yds., at $0.80            2.21
Sand, 0.46 cu. yd., at $0.80              0.37
Water                                     0.05
                                          ----
Total                                   $10.71

COST OF 4 FT. SIDEWALK.
                                        Per 100
Item.                                   sq. ft.
Labor                                   $ 6.73
Cement, 2.04 bbls., at $1.54              3.15
Gravel, 2.06 cu. yds., at $0.80           1.65
Sand, 0.49 cu. yd., at $0.80              0.39
Water                                     0.07
                                          ----
Total                                   $11.99

The rates of wages and the number of men employed were as follows: 1
foreman, at $3.50 per day; 1 finisher, at 30 cts. per hour; 1 helper, at
22 cts. per hour; 15 laborers, at 20 cts. per hour.

~Cost at Quincy, Mass.~--The following costs are given by Mr. C. M.
Saville for constructing 695 sq. yds. of granolithic walk around the top
of the Forbes Hill Reservoir embankment at Quincy, Mass. This walk was
laid on a broken stone foundation 12 ins. thick; the concrete base was 4
ins. thick at the sides and 5 ins. thick at the center; the granolithic
finish was 1 in. thick. The walk was 6 ft. wide and was laid in 6-ft.
sections, a steel plate being used to keep adjacent sections entirely
separate. The average gang was 6 men and a team on the base and 2 masons
and 1 tender on the finish. The average length of walk finished per day
was 60 ft. The cost was as follows:

Stone Foundation:                            Per cu. yd.  Per sq. ft.

Broken stone for 12-in. foundation              $ 0.40         $0.015
Labor placing at 15 cts. per hour                 1.50          0.056
                                                 -----         ------
Totals                                          $ 1.90         $0.071

Concrete Base 4½ ins. Thick:

1.22 bbls. cement per cu. yd. at $1.53           $ 1.87        $0.026
0.50 cu. yd. sand per cu. yd. at $1.02             0.51         0.007
0.84 cu. yd. stone per cu. yd. at $1.57            1.32         0.019
Labor (6 laborers, 1 team)                         3.48         0.050
                                                   ----         -----
Total for 90 cu. yds.                            $ 7.18        $0.102

Granolithic Finish 1 in. Thick:

4 bbls. cement per cu. yd. at $1.53              $ 6.12        $0.019
0.8 cu. yd. sand at $1                             0.80         0.002
Lampblack                                          0.29         0.001
Labor (2 masons, 1 helper)                         6.36         0.016
                                                   ----         -----
Totals                                           $13.57        $0.038

The two masons received $2.25 per day each and their helper $1.50 per
day, and they averaged 360 sq. ft. per day, which made the cost 1-2/3
cts. per sq. ft. for labor laying granolithic finish. The cost of
placing the foundation stone is very high and the cost of concrete base
also runs unusually high, the reasons for these high costs are not
evident.

~Cost at San Francisco.~--Mr. George P. Wetmore, of the contracting firm
of Cushing & Wetmore, San Francisco, gives the following figures
relating to sidewalk work in that city. The foundations of cement walks
in the residence district of San Francisco are 2½ ins. thick, made of
1-2-6 concrete, the stone not exceeding 1 in. in size. The wearing coat
is ½ in. thick, made of 1 part cement to 1 part screened beach gravel.
The cement is measured loose, 4.7 cu. ft. per barrel. The foundation is
usually laid in sections 10 ft. long; the width of sidewalks is usually
15 ft. The top coat is placed immediately, leveled with a straight edge
and gone over with trowels till fairly smooth. After the initial set and
first troweling, it is left until quite stiff, when it is troweled again
and polished--a process called "hard finishing." The hard finish makes
the surface less slippery. The surface is then covered with sand, and
watered each day for 8 or 10 days. The contract price is 9 to 10 cts.
per sq. ft. for a 3-in. walk; 12 to 14 cts. for a 4-in. walk having a
wearing coat ¾ to 1-in. thick. A gang of 3 or 4 men averages 150 to 175
sq. ft. per man per day of 9 hrs. Prices and wages are as follows:

Cement, per bbl.                                $2.50
Crushed rock, per cu. yd.                        1.75
Gravel and sand for foundation, per cu. yd.      1.40
Gravel for top finish, per cu. yd.               1.75
Finisher wages, best, per hr.                    0.40
Finisher helper, best, per hr.                   0.25
Laborer, best, per hr.                           0.20

~Cost in Iowa.~--Mr. L. L. Bingham sent out letters to a large number of
sidewalk contractors in Iowa asking for data of cost. The following was
the average cost per square foot as given in the replies:

                                      Cts. per sq. ft.
Cement, at $2 per bbl.                     3.6
Sand and gravel                            1.5
Labor, at $2.30 per day (average)          2.2
Incidentals, estimated                     0.7
                                           ---
Total per sq. ft                           8.0

This applies to a walk 4 ins. thick, and includes grading in some cases,
while in other cases it does not. Mr. Bingham writes that in this
respect the replies were unsatisfactory. He also says that the average
wages paid were $2.30 per man per day. It will be noted that a barrel of
cement makes 55½ sq. ft. of walk, or it takes 1.8 bbls. per 100 sq. ft.
The average contract price for a 4-in. walk was 11½ cts. per sq. ft.


CONCRETE PAVEMENT.

Concrete pavement is constructed in all essential respects like cement
sidewalk. The sub-soil is crowned and rolled hard, then drains are
placed under the curbs; if necessary to secure good drainage a sub-base
of gravel, cinders or broken stone 4 to 8 ins. thick is laid and
compacted by rolling. The foundation being thus prepared a base of
concrete 4 to 5 ins. thick is laid and on this a wearing surface 2 to 3
ins. thick. As showing specific practice we give the construction in two
cities which have used concrete pavement extensively.

~Windsor, Ontario.~--The street is first excavated to the proper grade and
crown and rolled with a 15-ton roller. Tile drains are then placed
directly under the curb line and a 6×16-in. curb is constructed, vising
1-2-4 concrete faced with 1-2 mortar. Including the 3-in. tile drain
this curb costs the city by contract 38 cts. per lin. ft. The pavement
is then constructed between finished curbs, as shown by Fig. 119.

[Illustration: Fig. 119.--Concrete Pavement. Windsor, Canada.]

The fine profile of the sub-grade is obtained by stretching strings from
curb to curb, measuring down the required depth and trimming off the
excess material. The concrete base is then laid 4 ins. thick. A 1-3-7
Portland cement concrete is used, the broken stone ranging from ¼ in. to
3 ins. in size, and it is well tamped. This concrete is mixed by hand
and as each batch is placed the wearing surface is put on and finished.
The two layers are placed within 10 minutes of each other, the purpose
being to secure a monolithic or one-piece slab. The top layer consists
of 2 ins. of 1-2-4 Portland cement and screened gravel, ¼ in. to 1 in.,
concrete. This layer is put on rather wet, floated with a wooden float
and troweled with a steel trowel while still wet. Some 20,500 sq. yds.
of this construction have been used and cost the city by contract:

                                         Per sq. yd.

Bottom 4-in. layer 1-3-7 concrete           $0.57
Top 2-in. layer 1-2-4 concrete               0.32
Excavation                                   0.10
                                            -----
Total                                       $0.99

This construction was varied on other streets for the purpose of
experiment. In one case a 4-in. base of 1-3-7 stone concrete was covered
with 2 ins. of 1-2-2 gravel concrete. In other cases the construction
was: 4-in. base of 1-3-7 stone concrete; 1½-in. middle layer of 1-2-4
gravel concrete, and ½-in. top layer of 1-2 sand mortar. All these
constructions have been satisfactory; the pavement is not slippery. The
cost to the city by contract for the three-layer construction has in two
cases been as follows:

Church St., 8,000 sq. yds.:                  Per sq. yd.
4-in. base 1-3-7 concrete                       $0.57
1½-in. 1-2-4 and ½-in 1-2 mixture                0.32
Excavation                                       0.10
                                                -----
Total                                           $0.99

Albert and Wyandotte Sts., 400 sq. yds.:     Per sq. yd.

4-in. base 1-3-7 concrete                       $0.66
1½-in. 1-2-4 and ½-in. 1-2 mixture               0.39
Excavation                                       0.10
                                                -----
Total                                           $1.15

The cost of materials and rates of wages were about as follows:

Portland cement f. o. b. cars Windsor, per bbl.    $2.05
River sand, per cu. yd.                             1.15
River gravel, screened, per cu. yd.                 1.25
Crushed limestone, ¼ to 3 ins., per ton             1.15
Labor, per day                              1.75 to 2.00

At these prevailing prices the contractor got a fair profit at the
contract price of $1.15; at 99 cts., any profit is questionable,
according to City Engineer George S. Hanes, who gives us the above
records. Expansion joints are located from 20 to 80 ft. apart and are
filled with tar.

~Richmond, Ind.~--The first concrete pavement was built in 1896 and since
then it has been used extensively, especially for wide alleys and narrow
streets where traffic is heavy and concentrated in small space. The
method of construction has varied from time to time but the construction
shown by Fig. 120 is fairly representative. Usually a 1-3-5 concrete is
used for the base, 5 ins. thick, and a 1-2 mortar for the top coat, 1½
ins. thick. In 1904 this pavement cost the city by contract 16 cts. per
sq. ft. or $1.54 per sq. yd, with wages and prices as follows: Stone on
the work, $1.25 per cu. yd.; gravel and sand, $0.75 per cu. yd.; cement,
$2.25 per barrel; common laborers, 16½ cts. per hour, and cement
finishers, 40 cts. per hour.

[Illustration: Fig. 120.--Concrete Pavement, Richmond, Ind.]


~CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER.~

Current practice varies materially in constructing concrete curb and
gutter. The more common practice is to lay the curb and water table in
one piece, or as a monolith, but this is by no means universal practice.
In much work the curb wall and the water table slab are constructed
separately, the construction joint being sometimes horizontal where the
curb wall sits on the slab and sometimes vertical where the water table
butts against the wall. Again it is the common practice to construct
curb and gutter in sections, laid either alternately or in succession,
separated by sand joints to provide for expansion and contraction, but
this is not universal practice, much of such work being constructed as a
continuous wall with no provision for temperature movements except the
natural breaks at driveways. All of these types of construction appear
to have given reasonable satisfaction, but exact data for a final
comparison are not available, so that we are forced to reason on general
principles. Such a course of reasoning indicates that the best results
should be expected where the curb and water table are built in one
piece and in sections of reasonable length separated by expansion
joints.

[Illustration: Fig. 121.--Box Form for Concrete Curb.]

[Illustration: Fig. 122.--Continuous Form for Concrete Curb.]

~FORM CONSTRUCTION.~--The form construction for curb and gutter work is
determined by the general plan of construction followed,--whether
monolithic or two-piece construction. In monolithic construction two
types of forms are employed, sectional or box forms and continuous
forms. A good example of box form is shown by Fig. 121. This form was
designed for a curb 14 ins. high at the back, 6 ins. high in front and
24 ins. from face of curb to outer edge of gutter, constructed in
sections 7 ft. long. The form, it will be observed, is a complete box,
in which alternate sections of curb are molded and after having set are
filled between using the same form but dispensing with the end boards
which are replaced by the completed sections of curb. A fairly
representative example of continuous form is shown by Fig. 122; in this
construction a continuous line of plank is set to form the back of the
curb and another line to form the face of the gutter slab, both lines
being held in place by stakes. When the gutter slab concrete has been
placed and surfaced the form for the front of the curb is set as shown
and the upper portion of the curb wall concreted behind it. The method
in detail of constructing curb and gutter, with this type of form, at
Ottawa, Ont., is described in a succeeding section. Here the joints
were formed by inserting a partition of 3/8-in. boiler plate every 12
ft., which was withdrawn just previous to finishing up the surface; the
sections between partitions were concreted continuously. Another method
is to make the partitions of plank, concrete every other section, then
remove the partition plank and concrete the remaining spaces against the
previously finished work. A different method of supporting the plank
forming the face of the curb wall, is to clamp it to the back form (Fig.
123), spacers being inserted to keep the two their proper distances
apart. The forms shown by Figs. 121 to 123 are for monolithic curb and
gutter. In two-piece construction where the curb wall is constructed on
the finished gutter slab practically the same method of construction is
employed as is illustrated by Fig. 122 except that no attempt is made to
concrete the curb wall before the slab concrete has begun to set. The
more common and the preferable method of two-piece construction is
illustrated by Fig. 124; the curb proper is built first using the simple
box form shown at the right hand, then the water table is built using
the completed curb as the form for the back and a board held by stakes
as a form for the front. This board is set with its top edge exactly to
the grade of the finished water table so as to serve as a guide for one
end of the template, the other end of which rides on the top of the
finished curb wall. Forms for curves at street intersections are best
constructed by driving stakes to the exact arc of the curve and bending
a 3/8-in. steel plate around them or bending and nailing 7/8×1¼-in.
strips. Soaking the wood strips thoroughly will make them bend easily.
The cost of form work in constructing curb and gutter is chiefly labor
cost in erecting and taking down the forms.

[Illustration: Fig. 123.--Continuous Form for Concrete Curb.]

[Illustration: Fig. 124.--Form for Two-Piece Curb Construction.]

~CONCRETE MIXTURES AND CONCRETING.~--The curb body is usually made of a
1-3-5 or 6 concrete and the curb finish of a 1-2 mortar. Portland cement
is employed almost exclusively. The concrete mixture commonly used is of
such consistency that thorough ramming is necessary to flush the cement
to the surface. The cubical contents of combined curb and gutter of the
forms illustrated will run from 3 to 5 cu. yds. per 100 ft., and about
one-eighth of this will be facing mortar 1 in. thick; thus a curb
running 5 cu. yds. per 100 ft. will contain per 100 ft. about 0.83 cu.
yd. of mortar and 4.17 cu. yds. of concrete. The usual method of
concreting is to erect the forms for the back of the curb wall and the
front of the gutter slab and concrete to the height of the water table
clear across; then shape the exposed top of the water table to section
and place the mortar finish, and then erect the face form for the gutter
wall, bring the concrete backing and vertical face finish up together
and, finally, finish the top. The finish coat is placed by troweling on
the horizontal surfaces; on the vertical face of the curb wall it may be
placed in any one of several ways. Frequently the mortar coat is simply
plastered against the face board and filled behind with concrete.
Another method is to lay a 1-in. board against the inside of the form,
concrete behind it, then withdraw the board, fill the space with mortar
and tamp concrete and mortar to a thorough bond. The special face forms
shown in Chapter VIII may be used in place of the board. The securing of
a good bond between the backing concrete and the mortar facing is
governed by the same conditions that govern sidewalk work.

~COST OF CURB AND GUTTER.~--The cost of concrete curb and gutter is
commonly estimated in cents per lineal foot. The cost of excavating,
loading and carting will run about the same per cubic yard as for
sidewalks. Excavating the trench and preparing the sub-grade usually
runs from ½ ct. to 2 cts. per foot of curb, but sometimes it amounts to
3 cts. Placing the sub-base will cost for placing and tamping 1 ct. per
ft., to which is to be added the cost of materials; a 6-in. sub-base 30
ins. wide contains 4.7 cu. yds., tamped measure, of materials per 100
ft. The amount of materials per foot depends upon the cross-section of
the curb; it equals in cubic yards the area of cross-section in square
feet divided by 27, and of this volume about one-eighth will be 1-2
mortar and seven-eighths 1-3-6 concrete. The tables in Chapter II give
the amounts of materials per cubic yard of these mixtures; the product
of these quantities and the cost of the materials on the ground gives
the cost. The labor cost of mixing and placing, including the form work,
will run from 10 to 14 cts. per foot. In round figures curb and gutter
of the section shown in the accompanying illustrations may be estimated
to cost in the neighborhood of 40 cts. per lineal foot. The following
sections give records of cost of individual jobs of curb and gutter
construction.

~Cost at Ottawa, Canada.~--The method and cost of constructing 1,326 ft.
of concrete curb and gutter at Ottawa, Ont., are given in some detail by
Mr. G. H. Richardson, Assistant City Engineer, in the annual report of
the City Engineer for 1905. We have remodeled the description and
rearranged the figures of cost in the following paragraphs.

The concrete curb was built before doing any work on the roadway, and
the first task was the excavation of a trench 2½ ft. wide and averaging
1 ft. 8 ins. in depth through light red sand. On the bottom of this
trench there was placed a foundation of stone spalls 8 ins. thick; in
width this foundation reached from 3 ins. back of the curb to 6 ins.
beyond the front of the water table. The curb was made 5 ins. thick and
ran from 10 ins. to 5½ ins. in height, and the water table was 14 ins.
wide and 4 ins. thick, with a fall of 1¼ ins. from front to back. The
concrete used was a mixture of 1 Portland cement, 3 sand, 3 5/8-in.
screened limestone, and 4 2-in. stone. It was deposited in forms and
tamped to bring the water to the face and then smoothed with a light
troweling of stiff mortar.

The forms were constructed by first setting pickets and nailing to them
a back board 2 ins. thick and 12 ins. wide and a front board 2 ins.
thick and 6 ins. wide. The concrete for the water table was deposited in
this form in sections and brought to surface by straight edge riding on
wooden strips nailed across the form and properly set to slope, etc.
After the water table had been troweled down and brushed a 1×10-in.
board was set to mold the front face of the curb. This board was
sustained by small "knee frames" made of three pieces of 1×2-in. stuff,
one conforming to the slope of the water table and long enough to extend
beyond the front of the 2×6-in. front board, a second standing plumb and
bearing against the 1×10-in. face board, and the third forming a small
corner brace between the two former to hold them in their proper
relative positions. The 1×10-in. face board, etc., was separated from
the 2×12-in. back board by a 5-in. block at each end, and then braced by
the knee frames every 3 or 4 ft. In this way it was possible to bring
this 1×10-in. board into perfect line by moving the knee braces in or
out, and when correct nailing them to the 2×6-in. front board. The
1×10-in. face board being in position and braced and lined, the curb
material was thoroughly tamped in, and when ready was troweled and
brushed on the top, a small round being worked onto the top front corner
with the trowel.

Expansion joints were provided for by building into the curb every 12
ft., a piece of 3/8-in. boiler plate, which was afterward withdrawn and
the joint filled with sand and faced over. As soon as the concrete had
set sufficiently the face board was taken down and face of curb finished
and brushed, the fillet between curb and water table being finished to
2½ ins. radius. Circular curb and gutter of same construction was built
at each corner, ½-in. basswood being used for forms, instead of 2×1-in.
lumber.

In addition to the actual construction of curb and gutter the cost given
below includes the cleaning up of the street, spreading or removal of
all surplus material from excavation, and the extension of all sidewalks
out to the curbs at the corners. It was also necessary to maintain a
watchman on this work, which duty, under ordinary circumstances, would
be done by the general watchman. The total length built was 1,326 ft.,
of which 1,209 ft. is straight and 117 ft. curved to a 12-ft. radius.

The rates of wages paid were $2 for horse and cart, $1.65 for watchman,
and an average of $1.90 per day for labor, including foreman; all for
nine hours' work per day. The working force consisted of foreman,
finisher, handy man. four concrete men, and three laborers.

The labor cost of the work was as follows:

                                            Per ft.  P. C. of
    Item.                        Total.       cts.     total.
Excavation and setting boards    $ 88.90       6.7         30
Laying stone foundation            43.30       3.3         14
Concreting                         61.30       4.6         20
Finishing                          45.15       3.4         15
Carting                             9.85       0.76         3
Watchman                           25.00       1.89         8
Clearing up                        13.60       1.04         4
Extras (sidewalk extensions)       17.23       1.31         6
                                 -------      -----        --
      Total                      $304.33      23.00       100

The cost of materials for curb and foundation were as follows:

                                               Per lin. ft.
                                     Total.        cts.
171.112 tons spalls                  $102.93       7.76
42 tons 2-in. stone                    41.16       3.09
30.8 tons 5/8-in. stone                42.57       3.21
33,000 lbs. cement                    161.70      12.19
24 cu. yds. sand                       19.20       1.45
                                     -------      -----
       Total                         $367.56      27.70

The cost of supplies and tools was as follows:

1,000 ft. B. M. 2×12 boards charged off             $ 9.25
  500 ft. B. M. 2×6 boards charged off                4.12
1,000 ft. B. M. 1×10 boards charged off              14.25
½-in. basswood                                        4.30
½ keg 3-in. nails                                     1.42
½ keg 4-in. nails                                     1.43
Pickets                                               3.25
Tools charged off                                     3.15
                                                    ------
      Total                                         $41.17

This total, when divided by 1,326 lin. ft. of curb, gives the cost per
lineal foot as about 3 cts. We can now summarize as follows:

                                Per lin.   P. C. of
   Item.              Total.       ft.       total.
Labor               $304.33        23         43
Material             367.56        28         51
Supplies              41.17         3          6
                    -------      ----        ---
      Total         $713.06     $0.54        100

As indicated above, on more extensive work the costs of carting,
watchman, cleaning up, and extras would be avoided. They cost on this
work 5 cts. and the work could therefore be done for 49 cts. if no such
charges were included. On such work also the charge for supplies would
be lower per foot and on any future work the labor cost could be
materially lowered, this curb having been somewhat of an experiment as
to method of construction. It is thought that with no charges for
carting, cleaning, watchman, and extras, and with the experience
obtained, this curb could be built for about 46 cts. The proportions
adopted and the method of construction followed, produce a very strong,
dense, homogeneous curb and gutter.

[Illustration: Fig. 125.--Concrete Curb and Gutter at Champaign, Ill.]

~Cost at Champaign, Ill.~--The following costs were recorded by Mr.
Charles Apple, and relate to work done at Champaign, Ill., in 1903. The
work was done by contract, at 45 cts. per lin. ft. of the curb and
gutter shown in Fig. 125.

The concrete curb and gutter was built in a trench as shown in the cut.
The earth was removed from this trench with pick and shovel at a rate of
1 cu. yd. per man per hour. The concrete work was built in alternate
sections, 7 ft. in length. A continuous line of planks was set on edge
to form the front and back of the concrete curb and gutter; and wood
partitions staked into place, were used. The cost of the work was as
follows:

                                           No. of   Total    Cost per
Item.                                      men.     wages.   100 ft.
Opening trench, 18×30-in.                    2      $3.50    $2.43
Placing and tamping cinders                  2       3.50     1.00

Setting forms:
Boss setter                                  1       3.00     ...
Assistant setter                             1       2.00     ...
Laborer                                      1       1.75     ...
                                            --      -----   -----
                                             3      $6.75   $1.69

Mixing and placing concrete:
Clamp man                                     1     $1.75     ...
Wheelers                                      3      5.25     ...
Mixing concrete                               4      7.00     ...
Mixing finishing coat                         2      3.50     ...
Tampers                                       1      1.75     ...

Finishing:
Foreman and boss finisher                     1      4.00     ...
Assistant finisher                            1      3.00     ...
Water boy                                     1       .50     ...
                                             --    ------   -----
Total making concrete                        14    $26.75   $7.64
Total for labor per 100 ft                                 $12.76

Materials for 100 lin. ft.:      Quantity.      Price.
Portland cement                8-1/3 bbls.      $1.85      $15.42
Cinders                        7.5 yds.           .50        3.75
Gravel                         2.5 yds.          1.00        2.50
Broken stone                   2.5 yds.          1.40        3.50
Sand                           1.0               1.00        1.00
Total for material per 100 ft                              $26.17
Total for material and labor per 100 ft.                   $38.93

This is the total cost, exclusive of lumber, tools, interest, profits,
etc., and it is practically 40 cts. per lin. ft.

In 100 lin. ft. of curb and gutter there were 4.6 cu. yds. of concrete
and mortar facing, 4 cu. yds. of which were concrete; hence the 9 men in
the concrete gang laid 14 cu. yds. of concrete per day, whereas the 4
men mixing and placing the mortar finishing laid only 2½ cu. yds. of
mortar per day, assuming that the mortar finishing averaged just 1 in.
thick. Since these 4 men (2 mixers and 2 finishers) received $10.50 a
day, it cost more than $4 per cu. yd. to mix and place the 1-2 mortar,
as compared with $1.41 per cu. yd. for mixing and placing the concrete.
The concrete was built in alternate sections 7 ft. long. The 3 men
placing forms averaged 400 lin. ft. a day, so that the cost of placing
the forms was $1 per cu. yd. of concrete. The 2 men placing and tamping
cinders averaged 16 cu. yds. of cinders per day, or 8 cu. yds. per man.
This curb and gutter was built by contract at 45 cts. per lin. ft.

For several jobs, in which a curb and gutter essentially the same as
shown in Fig. 125 was built, our records show a general correspondence
with the above given data of Mr. Apple. Our work was done with smaller
gangs, 1 mason and 2 laborers being the ordinary gang. Such a gang would
lay 80 to 100 lin. ft. of curb and gutter per 10-hr. day, at the
following cost:

1 mason at $2.50              $2.50
2 laborers at $1.50            3.00
                              -----
Total                         $5.50

This made a cost of 5½ to 7 cts. per lin. ft. for labor, and it did not
include the cost of digging a trench to receive the curb and gutter.




CHAPTER XVI.

METHODS AND COST OF LINING TUNNELS AND SUBWAYS.


[Illustration: Fig. 126.--Section Showing Lining for Capitol Hill
Tunnel. Washington, D. C.]

Tunnel lining work is of two distinct classes: Lining work, done during
original construction and relining of tunnels in service. The methods of
work to be adopted and the cost of work will be different in the two
cases. In relining work the costs are increased by the necessity of
providing for the movement of trains and by the delays due to these
movements and also by the labor of removing the old lining and, often,
of enlarging the excavation. Comparatively few published figures are
available on the cost of concrete tunnel lining, and such as exist are
commonly incomplete. The common practice is to record the cost as so
much per lineal foot of tunnel. This should be done, but the record
should also show the cost per cubic yard of concrete in the lining. The
notions of engineers vary as to the proper thickness of lining to use
and this dimension also varies with the character of the ground. One
tunnel lining may easily contain twice as many cubic yards of concrete
per lineal foot of lining as another tunnel contains.

The two problems in form construction for tunnel work are: First, to
construct the form work so that it does not interfere with train
movements, and, second, to construct it so that it can be taken down,
transported and re-erected and thus used over and over. The examples of
practice given in the succeeding sections are the best instructions that
can be laid before the reader in regard to possible ways of solving
these problems and, also, the problem of handling the concrete and other
materials to the work.

[Illustration: Fig. 127.--Traveling Derrick for Constructing Side and
Center Walls, Capitol Hill Tunnel.]

[Illustration: Fig. 128.--Steel Forms for Side Walls for Capitol Hill
Tunnel.]

~METHOD OF LINING CAPITOL HILL TUNNEL, PENNSYLVANIA R. R., WASHINGTON, D.
C.~--The tunnel through Capitol Hill for the Pennsylvania R. R. approach
to its new Union Station at Washington, D. C, is a two-track, double
tube tunnel 4,000 ft. long through earth. Figure 126 shows the lining
construction; it consists of stone masonry center wall, mass concrete
inverts and side walls and a brick roof arch backed with concrete. For
building the center and side walls the traveling derrick shown by Fig.
127 was employed. This traveler moved ahead with the work on a 14-ft.
gage track and it handled the stone and concrete buckets from the
material cars to the workmen on the walls. In connection with the
derrick in the concrete side wall construction use was made of steel
plate forms for the inside faces of the walls. These forms were made of
4×10 ft. sections of steel plate, constructed as shown by Fig. 128, and
connected together by bolting through the flanges. The steel forms were
erected by hand in advance of the derrick, 20 ft. of form on each side
at a time. The concrete buckets were brought into the tunnel on cars
hauled by electric motors from the mixing plant at the portal, and the
buckets were lifted by the derricks and emptied into the forms. The side
walls were concreted to the springing line and then the five-ring brick
roof arches were constructed on traveling centers and in 20-ft.
sections. The remainder of the concrete was then placed over the arches
by means of the special back-filling machine, shown by Fig. 129. This
machine also handled the earth used to fill behind the masonry. It
consisted of a platform mounted on wheels and of the same general
construction as the derrick platform. On the forward end of this
platform a stationary hoist was mounted and behind this a belt conveyor
platform.

[Illustration: Fig. 129.--Device for Placing Concrete Back Filling for
Roof Arch, Capitol Hill Tunnel.]

The latter structure was pivoted near the forward end so that it could
swing right and left on a circular track under its rear end. It carried
a 30-cu. ft. hopper on its forward end, from under which a belt conveyor
ascended an incline toward the rear and was carried back into the space
behind the roof arch on a cantilever arm. In operating the back-filling
machine the material bucket was lifted from the car below, carried back
on the trolley beam until over the hopper and then dumped by hand into
the hopper. From the hopper the material dropped onto the conveyor belt
and was carried back over the arch and dumped in place ready for
tamping. The trolley beam of the hoist was so arranged that the hoisting
movement was vertical until the bucket hit the trolley and was then up
and backward until the stop at the end of the trolley beam was reached.
This point was directly over the hopper. Hoisting was done by a Lambert
engine, driven by a 15 H.P. electric motor. The conveyor belt was 20
ins. wide and was operated at a speed of 180 ft. per minute by a 7½ H.P.
electric motor. The machine required two men to operate and was
considered to save the labor of twelve shovelers.

~METHOD OF CONSTRUCTING SIDE WALLS IN RELINING THE MULLAN TUNNEL.~--The
Mullan Tunnel, 3,850 ft. long, on the Northern Pacific Ry., about 20
miles west of Helena, Mont., had its original timber lining replaced in
1894 with a lining consisting of concrete side walls and a brick roof
arch. The construction of the old and new linings is shown by Fig. 130.
The method of constructing the side walls was as follows:

The original timbering consisted of sets of 12×12-in. posts carrying
five segment arches of 12×12-in. timbers joined by ½-in. dowels. For a
portion of the lining the posts carried plates on which the arches set;
elsewhere the arches rested directly on the post tops. The arches and
posts carried 4-in. lagging filled behind with cordwood. The timber
lining was removed to make place for the new work in the manner shown by
Fig. 130. When there were no plates a 7-ft. section AB was first
prepared by removing one post and supporting the undermined arch ribs by
struts SS. The timbering in this section was cut out and excavation
made for the wall footing. Two temporary posts FF were then set up,
fastened by hook bolts L and lagged behind to make the wall form.
Several of these 7-ft. sections were cut out at once, each two being
separated by a 5-ft. section of timbering. The mortar car shown in Fig.
130 was then run alongside the sections in order and enough 1-3 mortar
was run by chute into each to make an 8-in. layer. As the car moved
ahead to succeeding sections enough broken stone was shoveled into the
last preceding section to take up the mortar. The walls were thus built
in 8-in. layers and became hard enough to support the arches in from 10
to 14 days. The arches were then allowed to take footing on the wall,
and the posts of the remaining 5-ft. sections were removed and the
concrete wall built up as for the 7-ft. sections. Where the posts
carried wall plates the struts SS were not needed, the wall plate
supporting the undermined post as a beam. English Portland cement was
used and the concrete mixture was about 4 parts mortar to 5 parts broken
stone--a very rich mixture. The average progress was about 30 ft., or 45
cu. yds. of side wall per working day; the average cost of the walls,
including everything, was $8 per cu. yd. of concrete. The brick arch
cost $17 per cu. yd. Mr. H. C. Relf is authority for these figures.

[Illustration: Fig. 130.--Sketches Showing Method of Lining Mullan
Tunnel.]

~METHOD AND COST OF LINING A SHORT TUNNEL, PEEKSKILL, N. Y.~--The
following methods and costs of lining a double track railway tunnel 275
ft. long near Peekskill, N.Y., are given by Mr. Geo. W. Lee. In
presenting these data it is important to note that while some of the
methods described are applicable to so short a tunnel they could not be
used on a long tunnel. Figure 131 is a cross-section of the tunnel
showing the lining. The tunnel was through rock, which stood up without
timbering, and the rock section was excavated from 6 ins. to 3 ft.
outside the lining. A 1-2-4 concrete using crusher run stone below 1 in.
in size was used for the lining and portal head wall coping and a 1-3-6
concrete for the portal head walls proper. The cost of the portal head
walls is included in the costs given further on.

[Illustration: Fig. 131.--Cross-Section of Peekskill Tunnel, Showing
Lining.]

The side wall foundation trenches were first excavated from 1 to 3 ft.
deep and footing concreted and leveled up, the back of the footing being
carried up against the rock and the front lined to forms giving a 12-in.
offset to the side wall. The footings contained 200 cu. yds. of
concrete. Platforms 25 ft. square and level with the springing lines
were then erected at each end of the tunnel. A derrick was placed at
each platform to handle skips between it and the material tracks which
ran underneath and through the tunnel with a turnout at each end for
switching back empty cars. A 60 H.P. portable boiler supplied steam for
the derrick engines and a pump. The wall forms were built and erected in
panels 12 ft. long; these panels had 4×6-in. plates and sills, 4×4-in.
studs 3 ft. on centers and 2-in. dressed and matched spruce sheeting.
Four panels were set up, two on each side, midway of the tunnel and
braced to the tunnel track. Wheelbarrow runways carried on bents were
built from the platforms to the forms, one from one platform to one
side, another from the other platform to the opposite side. Temporary
bulkheads were erected to close the ends of the forms and they were
filled. Meanwhile carpenters were setting other panels at each end of
the two first erected on each side. After 24 hours the panels first set
were taken down and moved ahead and the processes described continued
until the full length of side wall was completed. The side walls were
not concreted back to the rock; back forms of 1-in. hemlock were used
and the space remaining was filled with spalls. The side walls contained
692 cu. yds. of concrete.

Arch forms were erected for 96 ft. at the center of the tunnel, using
12-ft. lagging, so that sections of this length could be taken down and
moved ahead, nine at each end. The lagging was first laid to a height of
3 ft. above the springing line on each side and the concrete dumped
directly in place from runways laid on the lower chords of the arch
ribs, which were placed 4 ft. apart. When the concrete reached a height
too great for direct discharge into the forms it was dumped on the
runway and passed over with shovels. On the upper portion of the ring
the concrete was first shoveled to a platform erected on the center
posts of the ribs about 2 ft. below the crown and then passed in on the
lagging which was laid in 4-ft. instead of 12-ft. lengths at this stage
of the work. As soon as each section of arch ring was completed it was
waterproofed with six layers of tar paper laid in hot tar and then
packed behind with spalls. The arch centers were struck in a
comparatively short time; in one instance they were struck 90 hours
after the last concrete was placed and no settlement was apparent. The
arch forms stuck so fast to the concrete, however, that they had to be
jacked down by chiseling out the lagging so as to get a bearing on the
arch concrete and by nailing thrust blocks to the rib posts. The section
was then hauled ahead by passing the main fall of the derrick through a
snatch block on the first rib. When hauled clear of the lining all but
the first 3-ft. of lagging on each side was removed; they were then
jacked into position. The arch ring contained 932 cu. yds. of concrete.

Including the portal head walls 1,948 cu. yds. of concrete were laid at
the following costs for labor and materials:

Item.                                         Total.         Per cu. yd.
Cement at $1.63 per bbl.                  $ 5,755.50           $2.951
Sand at $0.75 per cu. yd.                     662.94            0.339
Stone at $0.80 per cu. yd.                  1,303.20            0.668

Lumber--
Mixing platforms and runways                  336.89            0.174
Ribs, including hand sawing                   234.10            0.120
Backing boards                                134.44            0.069
Lagging                                       341.04            0.176
Sheathing                                     268.49            0.137
Plates, sills, studs, braces                  182.75            0.093
Coal                                          118.73            0.061
Oil                                            16.12            0.008
Hardware, nails, spikes, etc.                 224.39            0.118
Tools                                         181.10            0.093
Freight on stone, cement, etc.              3,089.86            1.584
Labor of all kinds                          8,036.31            4.121
                                          ----------          -------
Total                                     $20,885.86          $10.712

~METHOD OF LINING CASCADE TUNNEL, GREAT NORTHERN RY.~--The Cascade Tunnel,
13,813 ft. long, built in 1897-1900, was lined throughout with concrete
from 24 ins. to 3½ ft. thick, mixed and placed in the following manner:
It was necessary to place the lining without interfering with the
transportation of materials and excavated material to and from the work
ahead. The arrangement adopted to secure this end is shown by Fig. 132.
A platform 500 ft. long was constructed at the elevation of the wall
plates; the rear end of this platform was reached by an incline, up
which the cars loaded with concrete were hauled by an air hoist and
cable and delivered to any point on this platform. While each 500 ft. of
tunnel was being concreted, the next 500 ft. of platform in advance was
being built, with its approach incline, so that there was no delay in
the work.

Complete concrete plants were installed at each portal, advantage being
taken of the side hills of the approach into the mountain to handle as
much material as possible by gravity. Each plant was equipped with a No.
6 Gates crusher, 40-in.×8-ft. rock screens, and 16-in.×16-ft. screw
concrete mixers. Large storage bins for the cement, sand and stone were
built adjacent to the mixer plant. A 1-3-5 concrete was used. The stone
was crushed from the best rock obtained in the tunnel excavation. This
rock was loaded into the regular muck cars, taken to the portal by
electric motors, and then dumped into other cars below the level of the
muck cars. These cars were hauled by hoisting engine and cable to the
crusher floor and then dumped and sorted to avoid danger from pieces of
unexploded dynamite. It was then run through the crushers, washers and
screens to the stone bin and thence to the mixers. The mixed concrete
was discharged into cars on the level of the muck car tracks and these
cars were taken by motor into the tunnel to the incline, up which they
were hauled by cable and dumped on the platform. From the platform the
concrete was shoveled into the wall forms or onto the centers as
desired.

[Illustration: Fig. 132.--Traveling Platform Used in Lining Cascade
Tunnel.]

The walls were concreted in alternate 12-ft. sections, the weight on the
timber arch thus being gradually transferred from the plumb posts to the
walls. The roof arch was also built in 12-ft. sections, the centers
being in sections of corresponding length which were moved forward on
dollies and jacked up as the work advanced. Ten sections of centering
were used at each end. An average of 7 bbls. of cement were used per
lineal foot of lining. The average monthly progress of lining was about
600 ft. at each end. The concrete lining cost $44 per lin. ft. of
tunnel, done by company forces.

~METHOD OF RELINING HODGES PASS TUNNEL, OREGON SHORT LINE RY.~--The
centers and side wall forms and the methods of work adopted in relining
the Hodges Pass tunnel on the Oregon Short Line Ry. are explained in the
accompanying illustrations. This tunnel is 1,425.8 ft. long and when
constructed in 1882 was lined with timber. The new lining consists of
concrete side walls carrying a brick roof arch. Both the old and the new
linings are shown in the drawings. The tunnel is through a variety of
rock and clay strata, and through the soft strata an invert was
required. Altogether about one-third of the length of the tunnel was
provided with an invert. It will be noted also that the new lining
occupies materially more space than the old; this made necessary
considerable excavation in enlarging the section.

[Illustration: Fig. 133.--Method of Placing Invert Concrete, Hodges'
Pass Tunnel.]

The work of relining consisted of three operations, viz., the invert
construction, the construction of the side walls and the arch
construction.

[Illustration: Fig. 134.--Method of Constructing Concrete Side Walls,
Hodges' Pass Tunnel.]

The form of the invert is shown in Fig. 136. It, of course, had to be
constructed without entailing a break in the track, and the method
adopted was as follows: The ties and ballast were removed from a section
of track about 12 ft. long and in their place was substituted the timber
frame shown in Fig. 133. Under the middle portion of this frame a trench
reaching clear across the tunnel and having a width of 6 to 7 ft. in the
direction of the track was excavated to sub-grade of the invert. The
concrete was filled into this trench, formed to shape on top, and
allowed to harden. The bridging frame was then taken out and the ties
and ballast were replaced. Another section of track was then bridged,
trenched and concreted and so on until the length of invert required was
constructed.

[Illustration: Fig. 135.--Side Wall Forms for Plans A and B, Fig. 134.]

The side wall construction was a more complex operation. It comprised
first the removal of the old lining, the enlarging excavation and the
form erection and concreting. Two methods of performing this task were
employed. Both are illustrated in Fig. 134. By the first method,
designated as Plan A, the concreting was done continuously in sections
of considerable length. The forms used are shown in detail by Fig. 135.
By the second method, the concreting was done in alternate short panels.
This method is designated Plan B on the drawings, Fig. 134. The forms
used are shown in detail by Fig. 135. The only difference in the form
construction for the two plans is in the connection of the posts at the
top.

[Illustration: Fig. 136.--General Plan of Centers for Roof Arch, Hodges'
Pass Tunnel.]

The construction of the centering for the roof arch is shown by Figs.
136 and 137, Fig. 137 giving detail dimensions of the ribs and lagging.
The center, as shown by Fig. 136, consisted of four ribs spaced 3 ft. on
centers. Each rib consists of two side posts and an arch piece. The side
posts on each side are connected at the bottoms by a sill and at the top
by a cap. Jacks between the sill and a mud sill laid on the concrete
invert or in the ditch held the center in place during arch
construction. Lowering these jacks dropped the center onto trucks
traveling on the mud sills. Thus the center was moved along as the work
progressed. As will be noted from Figs. 134 and 135, the side wall forms
carried the work only to the bottoms of the old caps. The arch center
completed the concrete wall work and the roof arch. Only about one-third
of the new lining had the brick arch, as shown by the drawings; in the
remaining two-thirds the concrete was carried up much further on each
side; in fact, the brickwork constituted only the top third of the arch.

[Illustration: Fig. 137.--Details of Centers for Roof Arch, Hodges' Pass
Tunnel.]

In describing the forms and centers we have left much of the explanation
to the drawings. These show all dimensions and details, and indicate in
a measure the mode of procedure. The work done consisted of excavation
enlarging the section, of removing the old timber lining and of the form
work, concreting and bricklaying for the new lining. All of it above
convenient reach from the ground was done from a movable staging formed
by a deck fixed on a flat car so as to be adjustable in height. The
concrete was mixed by hand on this car platform and shoveled directly
into the forms, the platform being raised as the work increased in
height. The concrete used was a 1-3-5 mixture of 2½-in. broken stone.

The organization of the working force is not easily stated since the
work was done as the traffic permitted and varied with the conditions.
Generally from 12 to 16 men were all that could be employed to
advantage. Complete records of cost were kept, but they were destroyed
by fire, so that the only figures available on this point are the
totals. These are as follows:

  Item.               Totals.     Per lin. ft.
Labor                $21,129        $14.81
Materials             13,939          9.77
                      -------      -------
      Total          $35,068        $24.58

These amounts average the cost of the invert, which was required for
about one-third of the length, over the whole tunnel.

~RELINING A SHORT TUNNEL.~--The following figures show the cost of
relining with concrete a timber lined railway tunnel. The concrete side
walls were 14 ft. high and had an average thickness of 2½ ft. Therefore
each side wall averaged nearly 1.3 cu. yds. per lin. ft., and the two
walls averaged 2.59 cu. yds. per lin. ft. of tunnel. The concrete was
mixed 1-3-5, being, we believe, unnecessarily rich in cement. The
average amount of concrete placed in the walls per day was 50 cu. yds.

Cost of Side Walls.
  Materials--                                       Per cu. yd.
1.33 bbl. cement at $2.00                                 $2.66
0.5 cu. yd. sand at 0.18                                   0.09
0.75 cu. yd. stone at 0.55                                 0.41
                                                        -------
       Total                                              $3.16

  Labor on concrete--
0.01 day foreman at $5.00                                 $0.05
0.03 day foreman at $3.00                                  0.09
0.03 day engineman at $3.00                                0.09
0.35 day laborer at $1.75                                  0.61
-------                                                 -------
0.42   Total                                              $0.84

  Labor, removing timber, building forms, excavating, etc.--
0.02 day foreman at $5.00                                 $0.10
0.05 day foreman at $3.00                                  0.15
0.40 day laborer at $1.75                                  0.70
-------                                                 -------
0.47   Total                                              $0.95

  Miscellaneous--
0.02 day engineer and superintendent at $5.00             $0.10
Falsework and forms, timber and iron                       0.07
Tools, light, etc.                                         0.10
Interest and depreciation of $1,800 plant at 20% per annum 0.09
Train service, 0.03 day work train at $25                  0.75

  Summary concrete side walls--                     Per cu. yd.
Materials                                                 $3.16
Labor on concrete                                          0.84
Labor removing timber, etc.                                0.95
Train service                                              0.75
Miscellaneous                                              0.34
                                                        -------
       Total                                              $6.04

In the two side walls there were 2.59 cu. yds. of concrete per lin. ft.
of tunnel, hence the cost of the side walls was $6.04 × $2.59 = $15.64
per lin. ft. of tunnel. The concrete arch varied in thickness,
averaging from 14 to 20 ins. at the springing line to 8 to 14 ins. at
the crown. The arch averaged 1.2 cu. yds. per lin. ft. of tunnel. About
20 cu. yds. of arch were placed per day. The arch concrete was mixed
1-3-5 and the cost was as follows:

                     Cost of Concrete Arch.
  Materials--                                      Per cu. yd.
1.36 bbls. cement, $2.00                                 $2.72
0.05 cu. yd. sand, 0.18                                   0.09
0.75 cu. yd. stone, 0.55                                  0.41
                                                       -------
       Total                                             $3.22
1.8 cu. yds. dry rock backing at 0.55                    $0.99
  Labor on concrete--
0.02 day foreman at $5.00                                $0.10
0.12 day foreman at  3.00                                 0.36
0.88 day laborer at  1.75                                 1.54
-------           -------                               ------
1.02   Total        $1.96                                $2.00
  Labor placing 1.08 cu. yds. rock backing--
0.01 day foreman at $5.00                                $0.05
0.51 day foreman at  3.00                                 0.15
0.55 day laborer at  1.75                                 0.96
-------           -------                              -------
0.61   Total        $1.90                                $1.16
  Labor removing timbers, forms, excavations, etc.--
0.02 day foreman at  $5.00                               $0.10
0.04 day foreman at   3.00                                0.12
0.06 day carpenter at 2.50                                0.15
0.40 day laborer at   1.75                                0.70
-------            -------                             -------
0.52   Total         $2.06                               $1.07
   Train service--
0.06 day at $25                                          $1.50
  Miscellaneous--
Engineering and superintendence.                           .07
Falsework, timber and iron                                 .13
Tools, light, etc                                          .12
Interest and depreciation, $1,800 plant, 20% per annum    0.09

  Summary concrete arch--
Concrete materials                                       $3.22
Dry rock backing (1.8 c. y.)                              0.99
Labor and concrete                                        2.00
Labor placing 1.8 cu. yds. rock backing                   1.16
Labor removing timber, etc                                1.07
Train service hauling materials                           1.50
Engineering and superintendence                           0.07
Falsework, timber and iron                                0.13
Tools, light, etc.                                        0.12
Interest and depreciation plant                           0.09
                                                        ------
       Grand total                                      $10.35

It will be noted that the "train service" is an item that really should
be considered as a part of the cost of the materials, for the cost of
the sand and stone is the cost f. o. b. cars at the sand pit and at the
quarry, to which should be added the cost of hauling them to the
tunnel--to-wit, the "train service."

Summing up, we have the following as the cost per lineal foot for lining
this single-track tunnel with concrete: Per lin. ft.

2.59 cu. yds. side walls at     $6.04             $15.64
1.20 cu. yds. arch at           10.33              12.40
-------                        ------            -------
3.79 cu. yds.  Total            $9.38             $28.04

It should be remembered that the higher cost of the arch concrete is due
in large measure to the fact that 1.8 cu. yds. of dry rock packing above
the arch are included in the cost of the concrete. Strictly speaking,
this dry rock packing should not be charged against the arch concrete,
and, segregating it, we have the following:

                                                  Per lin. ft.
2.59 cu. yds. concrete side walls at     $6.04          $15.64
1.20 cu. yds. concrete arch at            8.18            9.82
2.16 cu. yds. dry rock at                 0.55            1.19
Labor placing 2.16 cu. yds. at            0.64            1.39
                                                        ------
     Total                                              $28.04

This is a much more rational analysis of the cost and a still further
reduction in the cost of the arch concrete might be made by prorating
the train service item ($1.50 per cu. yd. concrete). At least half of
this train service should be charged to the dry rock backing, for there
are 1.25 cu. yds. of sand and broken stone to 1.80 cu. yds. of dry rock
backing.

The amount of this dry rock backing, or packing, varies greatly in
different parts of a tunnel. In the first half of this tunnel it
averaged 1.8 cu. yds. per lin. ft., while in the second half it averaged
nearly 2.4 cu. yds. per lin. ft.

~METHOD OF MIXING AND PLACING CONCRETE FOR A TUNNEL LINING.~--The tunnel
known as the Burton tunnel is located on the Jasper-French Lick
extension of the Southern Ry., and about 4 miles from French Lick, Ind.
It is a single track tunnel 2,200 ft. long with 300 ft. at one end on a
4°-30' curve and 1,900 ft. on tangent. The material penetrated was slate
and loose rock, requiring solid timbering throughout. This timbering is
shown by Fig. 138, which also shows the concrete lining; the timbering
was embedded in the concrete lining.

[Illustration: Fig. 138.--Sections Showing Concrete Lining for Burton
Tunnel.]

The original timber lining was composed as follows: Posts 10×12 ins. and
spaced 3 ft. apart were set on 3×12-in. sills and carried 10×12-in.
wall plates which supported 10×12-in. segmental arch ribs spaced 3 ft.
apart. The lagging behind the posts was 3×6-in. stuff and the lagging
over the arch ribs was 4×6-in. stuff. The section of the concrete lining
is shown by Fig. 138, it required 4,132 cu. yds. of concrete and 161.43
lbs. of reinforcement per lin. ft. The concrete was a 1-2½-5 crushed
stone--between 2 in. and ¼ in. size--mixture; it required 1.16 bbls. of
cement, 0.52 cu. yds. sand and 0.92 cu. yds. of stone per cubic yard of
concrete. The amount of reinforcement per cubic yard of concrete was
39.1 lbs.

[Illustration: Fig. 139.--View of Mixer Plant Showing Car Tracks, Burton
Tunnel.]

[Illustration: Fig. 140.--View of Mixer Plant Showing Method of
Unloading Materials, Burton Tunnel.]

All the concrete was mixed and handled from one end of the tunnel. The
mixing plant was located in the approach cut at one end. A standard gage
main track ran through the cut. About 20 ft. in the clear to one side of
this track a trestle 500 ft. long was built, carrying an 18-ft. gage
derrick track and a narrow gage 3-cu. yd. dump car track. A stiff leg
derrick operating a 1 cu. yd. orange peel or a 1½ cu. yd. clam-shell
Hayward bucket was mounted on a carriage traveling on the 18-ft. gage
track. The side of the trestle nearest the railway track was sheeted
vertically and the space between this sheeting and the track was floored
over at track level for stock piles. Near the end of the trestle toward
the tunnel and on the same side of the track was the mixer plant. This
consisted of two 85 cu. yd. bins, one for sand and one for stone,
carried by a tower so that their bottoms were 25 ft. above track level.
Below the bins was a charging platform pierced by a measuring hopper.
Below the measuring hopper was a 1½ cu. yd. cubical mixer and below the
mixer was a 3-ft. gage track for 1½ cu. yd. Koppel side dump cars. To
the rear of the tower at ground level there was a 20-cu. yd. sand bin
and a 20-cu. yd. stone bin set side by side with a continuous bucket
elevator leading from each to the corresponding bin on the tower. The
cement house was located directly across the railway track from the
tower. At the side of the cement house nearest the track there was an
inclined bag elevator leading up to a bridge spanning the railway track
at the level of the charging floor of the mixer plant. On this bridge
ran a car for carrying bags of cement. The plant as described is shown
by Figs. 139 and 140.

In operation the derrick unloaded the stone and sand cars by means of
the Hayward buckets either into the bins at the feet of the bucket
elevators or onto stock piles on the flooring beside the trestle. When
put into stock piles the materials had to be reloaded by derrick into
the 3 cu. yd. cars on the trestle narrow gage track and carried by these
cars to the elevator boots. The sand and stone were chuted from the
tower bins directly into the charging hopper below. Here the cement
bags, brought across the bridge on the car into which they were loaded
directly by the bag elevator, were opened and the cement added to the
sand and stone. The charge was then dropped into the mixer and from the
mixer the batch dropped into the Koppel concrete cars.

In the tunnel a traveling platform was constructed on two standard gage
flat cars so coupled that a platform 100 ft. long and slightly narrower
than the clear space between side wall forms was obtained. Connecting
the end of the platform toward the mixing plant was a rampe or inclined
platform mounted on wheels. The Koppel car tracks from the mixer were
carried up the incline and the full length of the level platform. The
cars were hauled to the foot of the incline by a light locomotive. A
cable was then hooked to them; this cable was run through a block on the
level platform, its free end coming back to the locomotive, which thus
pulled the cars up the incline by moving back toward the mixer. On the
level platform the cars were pushed by hand and dumped on the floor,
whence the concrete was shoveled into the forms.

The platform construction deserves mention in the particular that it
provided for adjusting the platform vertically. At each corner of the
car a vertical post some 7 or 8 ft. high was set up. The side stringers
of the platform carried two vertical posts at each end; these two posts
were spaced just far enough apart to slide over the corner post, one on
each side of it. A block at the top of the corner posts with the hoist
line connected to the bottoms of the platform posts and the lead line
going to a winch head, thus made it possible to lift the platform any
distance within the height of the vertical post guide and hold it there
by blocking under the posts. The arrangement is shown roughly by the
sketch, Fig. 141. There was block and tackle for each corner post and a
winch at each end of the car. The vertical movement of the platform was
between 6 and 7 ft.

The floor was cemented first, then the side walls and finally the roof
arch. Floor construction was begun at the portal farthest from the
mixing plant. Koppel car tracks were laid through the tunnel and the
concrete was dumped from them directly on the ground. The cars were
hauled by a light locomotive. As the concreting advanced the dump car
track was raised and suspended from timbers across tunnel so that the
concrete could be placed under it. As fast as the floor hardened the
permanent standard gage track was laid and a temporary third rail placed
to give also a dump car track.

[Illustration: Fig. 141.--Sketch Showing Telescopic Support for
Concreting Platform, Burton Tunnel.]

When the floor had been finished the side walls were constructed, using
the traveling platform and beginning at the far portal. The wall forms
consisted of 4×6-in. studs, spaced 3 ft. apart and carrying 2×12-in.
lagging. A 6×6-in. waling outside the studs at about mid-height held the
studs to the timbering by lag bolts reaching through the wall to the
10×12-in. posts. A strip of plank nailed across wall between stud and
post held the form at the top. Wall forms were erected for 100 ft. of
wall at a time. These forms required about 45 ft. B. M. lumber per
lineal foot of form on one side or 90 ft. B. M. for both sides. Two sets
of side wall forms or 200 ft. of wall forming were built, and used over
and over again. The concrete was shoveled into the wall forms from the
traveling platform, the lagging being placed a board at a time as the
work progressed upward and the platform being elevated as required, its
final position being at about springing line level. When 100 ft. of side
walls had been completed the traveling platform was moved ahead for
another 100-ft. section.

[Illustration: Fig. 142.--Sketch Showing Device for Removing Centering
Ribs, Burton Tunnel.]

The centers consisted of 6×12-in. ribs, made up of 3×12-in. plank. The
feet of the ribs rested on folding wedges on 6×12-in. wall plates,
supported by 6×6-in. posts setting close against the finished wall.
The ends of the ribs were held from closing in by 6×6-in. walings, one
on each side, lag-bolted through the lining to the timbering. The
centering required about 315 ft. B. M. of lumber per lineal foot of
center. The method of removing the centers was novel. A flat car had
erected on it a narrow working platform high enough to reach well up
into the arch. Along this platform at the center was erected a sort of
"horse," which could be elevated and lowered by jacks. The sketch, Fig.
142, shows the arrangement. At each end and at the middle of the
platform two guide posts a a were erected and braced upright. Between
these guide posts set plunger posts which were raised and lowered by
screw jacks. The three plunger posts carried a longitudinal timber c.
The car was run under the ribs of centering to be removed and the timber
c raised by working the jacks until it came to close bearing under the
ribs d. The railings and the wedges at the foot of the ribs were then
removed, leaving the ribs hanging on the timber c. This timber was
then jacked down to clear the lining and the ribs rotated horizontally
on the point of suspension as a pivot until their ends swung in over the
platform. The car was then moved ahead to where the centers were to be
used again; the ribs were rotated back to their normal position across
tunnel; the timber c was jacked up, and the wedges and railings placed
at the first of the ribs.

The concreting on the roof arch was begun at the portal. Two shifts were
worked and 42 ft. of arch were concreted each shift.

~METHOD AND COST OF LINING GUNNISON TUNNEL.~--The costs are for concrete
in place in the side walls and the arch of the tunnel, for a length of
440 lin. ft. The quantity of concrete considered in estimating the cost
per cubic yard was 616 cu. yds. The material was mixed and placed in ½
cu. yd. batches, the proportion of the mixtures being 1-2.2-4.4. The
final cost includes the labor of excavating and screening gravel and
sand, the hauling of the same from the bins at the pit to the storage
bins at the main shaft, the care of the chutes in the shaft and the
mixing of the concrete in the tunnel at the bottom of the shaft, the
transportation of the concrete from the mixer to the traveler, the
deposition of the concrete, the setting up and taking down of forms and
the cost of the cement. It does not include the construction of the
gravel pit chutes that hold the screens, the building of the road from
the gravel pit to the storage bins at the shaft, the concrete mixer and
its installation, the traveler and its installation, the cost of
material and labor in the construction of the concrete forms, the
requisite power to run the machinery and other expenses of a similar
nature.

The gravel used for the concrete was obtained from a pit situated on top
of a hill not far from the main shaft leading down to the tunnel. This
gravel bed contains very closely the proper proportions of sand and
gravel for the concrete aggregates. The gravel was excavated and loaded
by hand into side dump cars of 35 cu. ft. capacity. These cars were run
to the edge of the hill where the gravel was dumped upon a screen from
which it ran by gravity, passing thence into storage bins. From the
storage bins the sand and gravel were drawn off into dump wagons having
a capacity of 2 cu. yds. and hauled a distance of one-half mile to a
second set of storage bins located at the top of the shaft leading into
the tunnel. The road from the storage bins at the gravel pit to the
storage bins at the head of the shaft was down grade. A two-horse team
could readily haul 2 cu. yds. of gravel over this road. The storage bins
at the top of the shaft leading into the tunnel communicated with the
measuring boxes at the bottom of the shaft by means of chutes. The
measuring boxes discharged directly into tram cars. The average length
of haul from the mixer to the place of deposition of concrete was about
4,500 ft.

The concrete was placed in the side walls by means of a traveler, which
was so operated in the tunnel as to allow the passage of the concrete
trains beneath it. The traveler was 64 ft. long and was provided with a
slow motion electric hoist, by which the cars containing the concrete
were elevated to the top of the traveler and thence transferred to any
desired position. The concrete was dumped from these cars into boxes
where any remixing or tempering that was required was done, after which
the concrete was shoveled directly into the forms. The entire operation
of handling the materials of the concrete, it will be seen, utilized
gravity to the greatest possible degree.

In order to get a good average cost per cubic yard for handling gravel
and sand, this analysis has been based on five months' operation, from
November, 1906, to March, 1907. In these five months there were 4,123
cu. yds. of sand and gravel handled. The concrete considered was placed
during the month of March. Below is given the distribution of the cost
of the concrete as to the specified divisions of the work and as to the
class of work involved in each division. Measurements taken at the mixer
show that each cubic yard of concrete contained 0.74 cu. yds. of gravel,
0.445 cu yds. of sand and 5.6 sacks of Portland cement. The total of the
aggregates is, therefore, 1.185 cu. yds. per cubic yard of concrete. The
cement costs $0.62 per sack on the work, making a cost of $3.472 per
cubic yard of concrete.

Excavating and screening 4,123 cu. yds. gravel--
                                                   Total     Per cu. yd.
                                                   cost.      gravel.
Foreman, 66-7/8 days at $3.04                    $ 203.30      $0.049
Labor, 397½ days at $2.56                        1,017.60       0.247
Labor, 116¼ days at $2.08                          241.80       0.059
                                                 --------      ------
Total                                           $1,462.70      $0.355

Hauling 4,123 cu. yds. gravel and sand--

2-horse team and driver, 210 days at
$3.60                                             $756.00      $0.183
2-horse team and driver, 4½ days at $4              18.00       0.005
                                                  -------      ------
Total                                             $774.00      $0.188

As there were 1.185 cu. yds. of gravel per cubic yard of concrete the
cost of gravel per cubic yard of concrete was for--

Excavating and screening (1.185 × $0.355)                      $0.421
Hauling (1.185 × $0.188)                                        0.223
                                                               ------
Total                                                          $0.644

Adding to this the cost of cement $0.62 × 5.6 = $3.472, we have $0.644 +
$3.472 = $4.116, as the cost of concrete materials per cubic yard of
concrete. The cost of labor, mixing and placing was as follows for 616
cu. yds.:

                                                   Total     Per cu. yd.
Mixing 616 cu. yds. concrete--                     cost.      concrete.
Superintendent, 2 days at $5.83-1/3                $ 11.67     $0.020
Foreman, 1 day at $4.50                               4.50      0.007
Labor, 45 days at $3.04                             130.72      0.215
Labor, 93 days at $2.56                             238.08      0.381
Hoist engineer, 34 days at $3.52                    119.68      0.196
                                                   -------     ------
Total                                              $504.65     $0.819

Transporting 616 cu. yds. concrete--

Superintendent, 1 day at $5.83-1/3                  $ 5.83     $0.009
Foreman, 1 day at $4.50                               4.50      0.007
Motorman, 34 days at $3.04                          103.36      0.175
Brakeman, 34 days at $2.56                           87.04      0.135
                                                   -------     ------
Total                                              $200.73     $0.326

Depositing 616 cu. yds. concrete--

Superintendent, 4 days at $5.83-1/3                $ 23.33     $0.038
Foreman, 4 days at $4.50                             18.00      0.029
Foreman, 68 days at $3.04                           200.72      0.326
Labor, 238½ days at $2.56                           610.56      0.991
                                                   -------     ------
Total                                              $852.61     $1.384

Setting and moving forms--

Superintendent, 2 days at $5.83-1/3                $ 11.67     $0.018
Foreman, 2 days at $4.50                              9.00      0.014
Carpenter foreman, 10 days at $5                     50.00      0.080
Carpenter, 13 days at $3.20                          41.60      0.067
Labor, 49 days at $3.04                             148.96      0.241
Labor, 19 days at $2.56                              48.64      0.078
                                                   -------     ------
Total                                              $309.87     $0.498

Summarizing we have the following cost:

Materials--
Cement, 5.6 bags at $0.62                                      $3.472
Gravel (excavating and screening)                               0.421
Hauling gravel and sand                                         0.223
                                                               ------
Total, materials                                               $4.116

Labor--

Mixing concrete                                                $0.819
Transporting concrete                                           0.326
Depositing concrete                                             1.394
Setting and moving forms                                        0.498
                                                               ------
Total, labor                                                   $3.037
Grand total                                                    $7.153

~COST OF CONCRETE WORK IN LINING NEW YORK RAPID TRANSIT SUBWAY.~--The
costs given here refer alone to the concrete work in constructing the
jack arch and steel beam lining of the original standard subway. Figure
143 shows the character of this construction. Arch panel forms were set
up between the wall beams and hung from the floor beams and filled
behind and above with 1-2-4 trap rock concrete. The form panels were
used over and over and the concrete was machine mixed. Common labor was
paid $1.50 per 8-hour day; foremen, $3; carpenters, $3; enginemen,
$3.50; and masons, $4. The costs cover three sections and are in each
case the averages for the whole section. They are, we believe, the only
itemized costs that have been published for concrete work on this road.

[Illustration: Fig. 143.--Cross-Section of New York Rapid Transit
Subway.]

_Two-Track Subway._--In this section of two-track subway there were
8,827 cu. yds. of foundation concrete and 6,664 cu. yds. of concrete in
wall and roof arches. The two classes of work cost as follows:

  Foundations--                          Total.       Per cu. yd.
Labor mixing                            $ 4,669         $0.53
Labor placing                             5,142          0.58
Materials and plant                         211          0.02
Cement, sand, stone, etc.                30,719          3.48
                                       --------       -------
     Total                              $40,741         $4.61
  Roof and side walls--
Labor mixing                            $ 5,444         $0.82
Labor placing                             5,623          0.84
Labor setting forms                      14,746          2.21
Labor plastering arches                     431          0.06
Materials and plant                       1,176          0.18
Cement, sand, stone, etc.                23,888          3.58
                                       --------        ------
     Total                              $51,308         $7.69

Averaging the work we have 15,491 cu. yds. of concrete placed at a cost
of $5.94 per cu. yd.

_Four-Track Subway._--On two sections of four-track subway the labor
cost of mixing and placing concrete similarly divided was as follows:

                                  Section A.      Section B.
  Foundations--                  Per cu. yd.      Per cu. yd.
Labor mixing                         $0.97          $0.94
Labor placing                         0.96           0.95
Power                                 0.14           0.16
                                  --------       --------
     Total                           $2.07          $2.05
  Roof and side walls--
Labor mixing                         $0.79          $0.91
Labor placing                         0.85           0.94
Labor setting forms                   2.01           1.20
Labor plastering arches               0.16           0.23
Power                                 0.28           0.15
                                   -------        -------
     Total                           $4.09          $3.43

[Illustration: Fig. 144.--Traveling Form for Side Walls, New York Subway
Tunnels.]

~TRAVELING FORMS FOR LINING NEW YORK RAPID TRANSIT RY. TUNNELS.~--In
constructing the tunnels under Park Ave. and under the north end of
Central Park for the New York Rapid Transit Ry., traveling centers and
side wall forms were used for the concrete lining. The mixing plants
were installed in the shafts and consisted generally of gravity mixers
charged at the surface and discharging into skip cars running on the
tunnel floor.

[Illustration: Fig. 145.--Traveling Form for Roof Arch. New York Subway
Tunnels.]

The forms used in the Park Ave. tunnel are shown by Figs. 144 and 145;
those used in the Central Park tunnel differed only in details. The
method of work was slightly different in the two tunnels, but was
substantially as follows: Three platforms mounted on wheels were used in
each set and two sets were employed. Ahead came a traveler carrying the
side wall forms, next came a shorter traveler carrying a derrick, and
last came the traveler carrying the roof centers. The arrangement
as operated in the Central Park tunnel is shown by Fig. 146. In the Park
Ave. tunnel the "bridges" were dispensed with, the skips being hoisted
through the open end bays of the derrick car and set directly on the
cars on the center traveler.

[Illustration: Fig. 146.--Sketch Plan of Traveling Forms, New York
Subway Tunnels.]

The traveler carrying the side wall forms was set in position and
blocked, the grade and line being given by the track rails, which had
been set exactly for that purpose. The side wall forms differed slightly
in the two tunnels; those for the Park Ave. tunnel shown by Fig. 144
formed the vertical portion of the wall only so that when the arch
forms, Fig. 145, followed a space A B was left which had to be molded
by separate sector-like forms. The side wall forms for the Central Park
work were constructed as shown by Fig. 147, being curved at the top to
merge into the arch centers. In the Park Ave. work the wall studs were
adjusted in or out by means of wedges and slotted bolt holes. In the
Central Park work the studs A Fig. 145 were hung by ¾-in. bolts from
the pieces B spiked to line onto the cross-braces. The bottom was then
lined up by means of wedges at D. The side wall studs being lined up,
the bottom lagging boards were placed and filled behind by shoveling the
concrete into them direct from skip cars on the adjacent tracks on the
tunnel floor. In this way the side walls were built up to the tops of
the forms.

[Illustration: Fig. 147.--Sketch Showing Detail of Side Wall Forms. New
York Subway Tunnels.]

As soon as the side wall concrete had set the forms were struck and the
traveler was moved ahead and set for another section of wall. The
derrick and roof arch travelers were then moved into position between
the finished walls, and the arch traveler was jacked up and aligned.
Skip cars coming from the mixer were run under the derrick traveler,
where the skips were lifted by the derrick and set on the platform cars
to be run alongside the work. The arch lagging was placed a piece at a
time and filled behind by shoveling direct from the skips. As the crown
was approached the lagging was placed in short lengths and filled in
over the ends, the concrete being shoveled in two lifts; in Fig. 145 the
line C D indicates the position of the shoveling board. The centers
were struck by lowering the jack supported traveler down onto the track
rails.

~COST OF MIXING AND PLACING SUBWAY LINING, LONG ISLAND R. R., BROOKLYN,
N. Y.~--The subway carrying the two tracks of the Long Island R. R. under
Atlantic Ave., in Brooklyn, New York city, has a lining consisting of an
invert arch 12 ins. thick at the center, side walls 4½ ft. thick at
the base and 3 ft. thick at the top, and a roof of jack arches between
steel I-beams 5 ft. apart. The dimensions inside the concrete are 16×20
ft. A 1-8 mixture of cement, sand, gravel and stone was used in the
floor and walls and a 1-6 mixture of the same materials in the jack
arches. A bag of cement was called 1 cu. ft., so that a barrel was 4 cu.
ft. A Hains gravity mixer and a batch mixer were used and careful
records were kept of all quantities.

_General Data._--During 1903, about 13,880 cu. yds. of the 1-8 concrete
were placed, 90 per cent. of which was mixed in the gravity mixer and 10
per cent. in the batch mixer. Of the 1-6 concrete 5,320 cu. yds. were
placed, 85 per cent, of which was mixed in the gravity mixer and 15 per
cent, in the batch mixer.

_Gravity Mixer Work._--During 1903, there were 16,940 cu. yds. of
concrete mixed in gravity mixers, requiring 2,860 days' labor mixing and
4,000 days' labor placing. Wages were $1.50 a day and the cost was 26
cts. per cu. yd. for mixing and 33 cts. for placing, making a total of
59 cts. per cu. yd. During the month of August when 2,800 cu. yds. were
mixed the cost was as low as 24 cts. for mixing, plus 22 cts. for
placing, or a total of 46 cts. per cu. yd. for mixing and placing. The
mixer averaged about 113 cu. yds. per day with a gang of 19 men mixing
and 26 men placing. The average size of batch was 0.46 cu. yd. In 1904,
20,000 cu. yds. were mixed in 190 days, worked with a gang of 19 men
mixing; the gang placing consisted of 25 men. The cost was as follows:

  Item.                            Total.  Per cu. yd.
2,950 days labor mixing          $ 4,870       24 cts.
4,760 days labor placing           7,300       36 cts.
                               ---------      --------
      Total                      $12,170       60 cts.

During the best month of 1904, the labor cost was 16 cts. for mixing and
29 cts. for placing, or a total of 45 cts. per cu. yd.

_Batch Mixer Work._--During 1903 the batch mixer mixed 2,390 cu. yds. in
970 labor days mixing and 740 labor days placing at a cost of 59 cts.
per cu. yd. for mixing and 55 cts. per cu. yd. for placing, or a total
of $1.04 per cu. yd. During the month of June the cost was as low as 40
cts. for mixing and 30 cts. for placing, or 70 cts. per cu. yd. for
mixing and placing. The wages paid were $1.50 per day and the average
gangs were 11 men mixing and 14 men placing; the average batch mixed was
0.57 cu. yd. and the average output was 35 cu. yds. per day. During
1904, the mixer worked 153 days and averaged 46 cu. yds. per day; the
average size of batch was 0.44 cu. yd. The average gangs were 13 men
mixing and 11 men placing. The labor cost of 7,000 cu. yds. was as
follows:

  Item.                             Total.    Per cu. yd.
1,910 days labor mixing            $3,175       45 cts.
1,740 days labor placing            2,660       38 cts.
                                  -------      --------
       Total                       $5,835       83 cts.

_Haulage._--The costs given comprise in mixing, the cost of delivering
the materials to the mixer, and, in placing, the cost of hauling the
concrete away. A Robins belt conveyor was used to deliver materials to
the gravity mixer and this accounts, in a large measure, for the lower
cost of mixing by gravity. The mixed concrete was hauled from both
mixers in dump cars pushed by men.

_Form Work._--The labor cost of forms for 19,300 cu. yds. of concrete
placed in 1903 was $16,800, or 87 cts. per cu. yd. of concrete. The
total labor days consumed on form work was 6,340 at $2.70 per day. The
total cost of concrete in place for mixing, placing and form work was
$1.46 per cu. yd., not including lumber in forms, fuel, interest and
depreciation.




CHAPTER XVII.

METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING ARCH AND GIRDER BRIDGES.


The construction problems in arch and girder bridges of moderate spans
are simple, and with the exception of center construction and
arrangement of plant for making and placing concrete, are best explained
by citing specific examples of bridge work. This is the arrangement
followed in this chapter.

~CENTERS.~--The construction of centers is no less important a task for
concrete arches than for stone arches. This means that success in the
construction of concrete arches depends quite as much upon the
sufficiency of the center construction as it does upon any other portion
of the work. The center must, in a word, remain as nearly as possible
invariable in level and form from the time it is made ready for the
concrete until the time it is removed from underneath the arch, and,
when the time for removal comes, the construction must be such that that
operation can be performed with ease and without shock or jar to the
masonry. The problem of center construction is thus the two-fold one of
building a structure which is immovable until movement is desired and
then moves at will. Incidentally these requisites must be obtained with
the least combined expenditure for materials, framing, erection and
removal, and with the greatest salvage of useful material when the work
is over. The factors to be taken count of are it, will be seen, numerous
and may exist in innumerable combinations.

[Illustration: Fig. 148.--Center for 50 ft. Arch Span (Supported).]

[Illustration: Fig. 149.--Center for 50-ft. Arch Span (Cocket).]

Centers may be classified into two types: (1). Centers whose supports
must be arranged so as to leave a clear opening under the center for
passing craft or other purposes, and (2) centers whose supports can be
arranged in any way that judgment and economy dictate. Centers of the
first class are commonly called cocket centers. As examples of a cocket
and of a supported center and also as examples of well thought out
center design we give the two centers shown by Figs. 148 and 149, both
designed for a 50-ft. span segmental arch by the same engineer. The
development of the center shown by Fig. 148 into the cocket center shown
by Fig. 149 is plainly traceable from the drawings. In respect to the
center shown by Fig. 149 which was the construction actually adopted we
are informed that 16,464 ft. B. M. were required for a center 36 ft.
long, that the framing cost about $12 per M. ft. B. M., with carpenters'
wages at $4 per day, and that the cost of bolts and nuts was about $1.50
per M. ft. B. M. With lumber at $20 per M. ft. B. M., this center framed
and erected would cost about $35 per M. ft. B. M. As an example of
framed centers for larger spans we show by Fig. 158 the centers for the
Connecticut Avenue Bridge at Washington, D. C., with costs and
quantities; other references to costs are contained in the index.

A center of very economical construction is shown by Fig. 159, and is
described in detail in the accompanying text. The distinctive feature of
this center is the use of lagging laid lengthwise of the arch and bent
to curve. Another example of this form of construction may be found in a
3-span arch bridge built at Mechanicsville, N. Y., in 1903. The viaduct
was 17 ft. wide over all, and consisted of two 100-ft. spans and one
50-ft. span. Pile bents were driven to bed rock, the piles being spaced
6 ft. apart and the bents 10 ft. apart. Each bent was capped with
10×12-in. timber. On these caps were laid four lines of 10×12-in.
stringers, and 8×10-in. posts 3 ft. apart were erected on these
stringers, and each set of four posts across the arch was capped with
8×10-in timbers the ends of which projected 3 ft. beyond the faces of
the arch. The tops of these cross caps were beveled to receive the
lagging which was put on parallel with the center line of the viaduct,
sprung down and nailed to the caps. This lagging consisted of rough
1-in. boards for a lower course, on top of which was laid 1-in. boards
dressed on the upper sides. Hardwood wedges were used under the posts
for removing the centers. In the centers, forms and braces for the three
arches there were used 140,000 ft. B. M. of lumber. The structure
contained 2,500 cu. yds. of concrete.

Another type of center that merits consideration in many places is one
developed by Mr. Daniel B. Luten and used by him in the construction of
many arches of the Luten type of reinforced concrete arch. The
particular feature of this type of arch is that in shallow streams for
bridges of ordinary span the ends of the arch ring are tied together
across stream by a slab of concrete reinforced to take tension. This
slab is intended to serve the double purpose of a tie to keep the arch
from spreading and thus reduce the weight of abutments and of a pavement
preventing scour and its tendency to undermine the abutments.
Incidentally this concrete slab, which is built first, serves as a
footing for the supports carrying the arch center.

As an illustration of the center we choose a specific structure. In
building a 95-ft. span, 11-ft. 1-in. rise arch bridge at Yorktown, Ind.,
in 1905, the centers were designed so as to avoid the use of sand boxes
or wedges. Ribs of 2×12-in. pieces cut to the arc of the arch soffit
were supported on uprights standing on the concrete stream bed pavement.
The uprights were so proportioned by Gordon's formula for columns that
without bracing they would be too light to support the load of concrete
and earth filling that was to come upon them, but when braced at two
points dividing the uprights approximately into thirds they would
support their loading rigidly and without buckling. The design in detail
was as follows: The uprights near the middle of the span were about 15
ft. long and were spaced 7 ft. apart across the stream and 3 ft. apart
across the bridge. Each upright then was to support a loading of
concrete of 7 ft.×3 ft.×26 ins. and an earth fill 1 ft.×7 ft.×3 ft., or
a total load of about 9,000 lbs. Applying Gordon's formula for struts
with free ends,

                f S
     P = -------------------
                  l²
           I + --------
                 125h²

where P is the total load = 9,000 lbs., f is fibre stress for
oak--1,600 lbs., l is length of strut in inches and h is least
diameter of strut in inches, it was found that for a length of 15 ft. a
7×7-in. upright would be required to satisfy the formula, but for a
length of 5 ft., which would result from bracing each strut at two
points, a 4×4-in. timber satisfied the formula. Therefore, 4×4-in.
timbers braced at two points were used for the longest uprights. About
30 days after the completion of the arch the bracing was removed from
the uprights, beginning at the ends of the span and working towards the
middle. As the bracing was being removed the uprights gradually yielded,
buckling from 4 to 6 ins. from the vertical and allowing the arch to
settle about ¼ in. at the crown. This type of center has been
successfully employed in a large number of bridges.

Figure 150 shows a center for a 125-ft. span parabolic arch with the
amount and character of the stresses indicated and with a diagram of the
actual deflections as measured during the work.

[Illustration: Fig. 150.--Center for 125-ft. Span Parabolic Arch with
Diagram of Deflections.]

In calculating centers of moderate span there is seldom need of more
than the simple formulas and tables given in Chapter IX. When the spans
become larger, and particularly when they become very large--over 200
ft.--the problem of calculating centers becomes complex. None but an
engineer familiar with statics and the strengths of materials and
knowing the efficiency of structural details should be considered for
such a task. Such computations are not within the intended scope of this
book, and the design of large centers will be passed with the
presentation of a single example, the center for the Walnut Lane Bridge
at Philadelphia, Pa.

The main arch span of the Walnut Lane Bridge consists of twin arches
spaced some 16 ft. apart at the crowns and connected across by the
floor. Each of the twin arch rings has a span of 232 ft. and a rise of
70¼ ft., is 9½ ft. thick and 21½ ft. wide at the skewback and 5½ ft.
thick and 18 ft. wide at the crown. The plan was to build a center
complete for one arch ring and then to shift it along and re-use it for
building the other arch ring. The centering used is shown in diagram by
Fig. 151. It consists of five parts: (1) Six concrete piers running the
full width of the bridge upon which the structure was moved; (2) a steel
framework up to E G, called the "primary bent"; (3) a separate timber
portion below the heavy lines E I and W' I'; (4) the "main staging"
included in the trapezoid E I W' I', and (5) the "upper trestle"
extending from I I' to the intrados.

[Illustration: Fig. 151.--Center for 232-ft. Span Arch at Philadelphia,
Pa.]

The primary bent consists of four I-beam post bents having channel
chords, the whole braced together rigidly by angles. Each bent is
carried on 1½ ft.×6 in. steel rollers running on a track of 19×½ in.
plate on top of the concrete piers. Between the primary bents and the
main staging, and also between the main staging and the upper trestles
are lifting devices. The mode of operation planned is as follows: When
the center has been erected as shown and the arch ring concreted the
separate stagings under K I and K' I' are taken down. Next the
portions under the lines I E and I' W' will be taken down and
erected under the second arch. Finally the remainder of the center will
be shifted sidewise on the rollers to position under the second arch.

~MIXING AND TRANSPORTING CONCRETE.~--The nature of the plant for mixing
and handling the concrete in bridge work will vary not only with varying
local conditions but with the size and length of the bridge. For single
span structures of moderate size the concrete can be handled directly by
derricks or on runways by carts and wheelbarrows. For bridges of several
spans the accepted methods of transport are cableways, cars and cars and
derricks. Typical examples of each type of plant are given in the
following paragraphs, and also in the succeeding descriptions of the
Connecticut Avenue Bridge at Washington, D. C., and of a five-span arch
bridge.

~Cableway Plants.~--The bridge was 710 ft. long between abutments and 62
ft. wide; it had a center span of 110 ft., flanked on each side by a
100-ft., a 90-ft. and an 80-ft. span. The mixing plant was located at
one end of the bridge and consisted of a Drake continuous mixer,
discharging one-half at the mixer and one-half by belt conveyor to a
point 50 ft. away, so as to supply the buckets of two parallel
cableways. The mixer output per 10-hour day was 400 cu. yds. and the
mixing plant was operated at a cost of $27 per day, making the cost of
mixing alone 6¾ cts. per cu. yd. The sand and gravel were excavated from
a pit 4½ miles away and delivered by electric cars to the bridge site at
a cost of 50 cts. per cu. yd. Two 930-ft. span Lambert cableways set
parallel with the bridge, one 25 ft. each side of the center axis, were
used to deliver the concrete from mixer to forms. The cableway towers
were 70 ft. high and the cables had a deflection of 35 ft.; they were
designed for a load of 7 tons, but the average load carried was only 3
or 4 tons. These cableways handled practically all the materials used in
the construction of the bridge. They delivered from mixer to the work
400 cu. yds. of concrete 450 ft. in 10 hours at a cost of 2 cts. per cu.
yd. for operation.

[Illustration: Fig. 151a.--Cableway for Concreting Bridge Piers.]

Another example of cableway arrangement for concreting bridge piers is
shown by Fig. 151a. The river was about 800 ft. wide, about 3 ft. deep
and had banks about 20 ft. high. The piers were about 21 ft. high. The
towers for the cableway consisted of a 55-ft. derrick without boom,
placed near the bank on the center line of the piers and well guyed and
a two-leg bent placed in the middle of the river and held in place by
four cable guys anchored to the river bottom. A ¾-in. steel hoisting
cable was stretched from a deadman on shore, about 150 ft. back of the
derrick, and followed along the center line of the piers, past the
derrick just clearing it, to the bent in the middle of the river. At the
top of this bent was a 16-in. cable block. Through this block the cable
passed down and was made fast to a weight, consisting of a skip loaded
with concrete until the cable had the required tension, and a pitch of
18 to 20 ft. from center of river to anchor on shore. In order to secure
the required pitch from the shore to the river bent the boom fall of the
derrick was hooked onto the cable at the foot of the mast, and then, by
going ahead on the single drum hoisting engine, was raised to the mast
head. This gave the cable a pitch of 18 to 20 ft. from mast head to top
of bent in river. The carriage vised on the cableway consisted of two
16-in. cable sheaves with iron straps, forming a triangle, with a chain
hanging from the bottom point, to which was attached the 5 cu. ft.
capacity concrete bucket. The concrete was mixed on a platform at the
foot of the mast. When ready for operation the chain on the carrier was
hooked to the bucket of concrete, the engine started, and both bucket
and cable raised, the former running by gravity to the pier. The speed
of descent was governed by the height to which the cable was raised on
the derrick, and as the bucket neared the dumping point the engine was
slacked off and the cable leveled. The bucket was dumped by a man on a
staging erected on the pier form. For the return of the bucket the
engine was slacked off and the weight on the river bent would pull the
cable tight so that the pitch would be toward the shore and the bucket
could run down the grade to the mixing platform, the speed being
governed as before by leveling the cable. When the piers were completed
to the middle of the river the engine and derrick were taken over to
opposite side of the river, the bent being left in the middle, and the
work continued. By using the extreme grade of the cable it was found
that the bucket would run from the platform to the bent (400 ft.) in
less than 35 seconds.

[Illustration: Fig. 152.--Sketch Showing Car and Trestle Plant for
Concreting an Arch Bridge.]

~Car Plant for 4-Span Arch Bridge.~--The bridge had four 110-ft. skew
spans, and a total length of 554 ft. The mixing plant was located
alongside one abutment on a side hill so that sand and stone could be
stored on the slope above. The mixer was set on a platform high enough
to clear cars below. Above it and to the rear a charging platform
reached back to the stone and sand piles. Side dump cars running on a
track on the charging platform took sand and stone to the mixer and
cement was got from a cement house at charging platform level. The
concrete for the abutment adjacent to the mixer was handled in buckets
by a guy derrick. A trestle, Fig. 152, was then built out from the mixer
to the first pier; this trestle was so located as to clear the future
bridge about 20 ft. and was carried out from shore parallel to the
bridge until nearly opposite the pier site, where it was swung toward
and across the pier. The concrete was received from the mixer in bottom
dump push cars; these cars were run out over the pier site and dumped.
When the first pier had been concreted to springing line level, the main
trestle was extended to opposite the second pier and the branch track
was removed from over the first pier and placed over the second pier.
This operation was repeated for the third pier. The last extension of
the main track was to the far shore abutment, where the bodies of the
cars were hoisted by derrick and dumped into the abutment forms. The
derrick was the same one used for the first abutment having been moved
and set up during the construction of the intermediate piers. To
construct the arches a second trestle was built composed partly of new
work and partly of the staging for the arch centers. This trestle rose
on an incline from the mixer to the first pier across which it was
carried at approximately crown level of the arch. The concrete for the
portion of the pier above springing line and for the lower portions of
the haunches was dumped direct from the cars. For the upper parts of the
arch the concrete was brought to the pier track in two-wheel carts on
push cars and thence these carts were taken along the arch toward shore
on runways. When the first arch had been concreted the second trestle
was extended to pier two and the operation repeated to concrete the
second arch.

~Hoist and Car Plant for 21-Span Arch Viaduct.~--The double track concrete
viaduct replaced a single track steel viaduct, being built around and
embedding the original steel structure which was maintained in service.
The concrete viaduct consisted of 21 spans of 26 ft., 7 spans of 16 ft.,
and 2 spans of 22 ft. With piers it required about 15,000 cu. yds. of
concrete. Two Ransome concrete hoists, one on each side of the original
steel structure near one end, were supplied with concrete by a No. 4
Ransome mixer. The mixer discharged direct into the bucket of one hoist
and by means of a shuttle car and chute into the bucket of the other
hoist.

The shuttle car ran from the mixer up an incline laid with two tracks,
one narrow gage and one wide gage, having the same center line. The car
was open at the front end and its two rear wheels rode on the broad gage
rails and its two forward wheels rode on the narrow gage rails. At the
top of the incline the narrow gage rails pitched sharply below the grade
of the broad gage rails so that the rear end of the car was tilted up
enough to pour the concrete into a chute which led to the bucket of the
hoist. The sand and gravel bins were elevated above the mixer and
received their materials from cars which dumped directly from the steel
viaduct.

The hoist buckets discharged into two hoppers mounted on platforms on
the old viaduct. These platforms straddled two narrow gage tracks, one
on each side of the old viaduct parallel to and clearing the main track.
These side tracks were carried on the cantilever ends of long timbers
laid across the old viaduct between ties. At street crossings the
overhanging ends of the long timbers were strutted diagonally down to
the outside shelf of the bottom chords of the plate girder spans. Six
cars were used and the concrete was dumped by them directly into the
forms; the fall from the track above being in some cases 40 ft. The
hoists and shuttle car were operated by an 8½×12-in. Lambert derrick
engine, the boiler of which also supplied steam to the mixer engine. The
concrete cars were operated by cable haulage by two Lambert 7×10-in.
engines.

The labor force employed in mixing and placing concrete, including form
work, was 45 men, and this force placed on an average 200 cu. yds. of
concrete per day. Assuming wages we get the following costs of different
parts of the work for labor above:

Item.                                          Per day.   Per cu. yd.
1 timekeeper at $2.50                          $ 2.50       $0.0125
1 general foreman at $5                          5.00        0.0250
3 enginemen at $5                               15.00        0.0750
1 carpenter foreman at $4                        4.00        0.0200
12 carpenters at $3.50                          42.00        0.2100
1 foreman at $4                                  4.00        0.0200
8 men mixing and transporting at $1.75          14.00        0.0700
13 men placing concrete at $1.75                22.75        0.1137
1 foreman finishing at $4                        4.00        0.0200
4 laborers finishing at $1.75                    7.00        0.0350
                                               ------       -------
45 men at $2.70                               $120.25       $0.6012

It is probable that the carpenter work includes merely shifting and
erecting forms and not the first cost of framing centers. No materials,
of course, are included. It should be kept in mind that while the output
and labor force are exact the wages are assumed.

~Traveling Derrick Plant for 4-Span Arch Bridge.~--The bridge consisted of
four 70-ft. arch spans and was built close alongside an old bridge which
it was ultimately to replace. The approach from the west was across a
wide flat; at the east the ground rose more abruptly from the stream.
Conditions prevented the use of a long spur track and also made it
necessary to install all plant at and to handle all material from the
west bank. A diagram sketch of the arrangement adopted is shown by Fig.
153.

[Illustration: Fig. 153.--Sketch Showing Traveling Derrick Plant for
Concreting an Arch Bridge.]

The track from the west approached the existing bridge on an embankment
25 ft. high. A spur track 175 ft. long from clear post to end was built
on trestle as shown. The cement house and mixer platform were placed at
the foot of the embankment at opposite ends of the spur track. Between
the two the slope of the embankment was sheeted with 1-in. boards and a
timber bulkhead 4 ft. high was built along the toe of the sheeting.
Stone, sand and coal were stored behind the bulkhead on the sheeting. A
runway close to the bulkhead connected the cement house with the mixer
platform, all materials to the mixer being wheeled in barrows on this
runway. A ¾-cu. yd. Smith mixer was set on a platform 5 ft. above ground
with its discharge end toward the stream. Beginning under this platform
a service track was carried across the flat and stream to the extreme
end of the east abutment. This track consisted of three rails, two rails
4 ft. apart next to the work and a third rail 25 ft. from the first. The
4-ft. gage provided for cars carrying concrete buckets from the mixer
and the 25-ft. gage provided for a traveling derrick; 18-lb. rails were
used and they proved to be too light, 40-lb. rails are suggested. The
derrick consisted of a triangular platform carrying a stiff leg derrick
with a 25-ft. mast and mounted on five wheels. The wheels were double
flange 16 ins. diameter and cost $30 each, being the most expensive part
of the derrick. The derrick was made on the ground and took four
carpenters between 3 and 4 days to build. Derrick and 350 ft. of service
track, including pole trestle across the stream, cost between $600 and
$800. The derrick was moved by means of a cable wrapped around one spool
of the Flory double-drum hoisting engine and leading forward and back to
deadmen set at opposite ends of the service track. Cars carrying
concrete buckets were run out on the 4-ft. gage track and the buckets
were hoisted by the derrick and dumped into a ½-cu. yd. car running on a
movable transverse track across the bridge. This transverse track was
necessary to handle the concrete to the far side of the work, the
derrick being set too low and the boom being too short to reach. The
derrick was used to handle material excavated from the pier foundations
and also to tear down the centers and spandrel forms. Some rather
general figures on the cost of this bridge are given by Mr. H. C.
Harrison, the contractor. They are:

Materials:                                  Total.

6,000 bbls. cement at $2.05                $12,300
2,500 cu. yds. sand at $0.80                 2,000
5,000 cu. yds. stone at $0.85                4,250
260 M. ft. B. M. lumber at $17               4,420
                                           -------
Total                                      $22,970

Labor:

Cofferdams, excavation and pumping         $ 3,000
Forms, falseworks and centers                2,000
Mixing and placing concrete                  4,000
Placing reinforcement                          400
Removing falseworks, forms, etc.             1,200
One coat pitch and paper                       150
Building plant, etc.                         2,250
                                           -------
Total                                      $13,000

Mr. Harrison states that including plant cost, delays, floods and
incidentals the cost per cubic yard of concrete was $8 and that
excluding these items the cost was $6 per cu. yd.

~COST OF CONSTRUCTING CONCRETE HIGHWAY BRIDGE, GREENE COUNTY, IOWA.~--The
following is the itemized cost of constructing a reinforced concrete
slab highway bridge, one of several built by the Highway Commissioners
of Greene County, Iowa, in 1906. The figures are given by Messrs. Henry
Haag and D. E. Donovan, the last being the foreman of the concrete gang
doing the work. All bridges consist of 10 to 12-in. slabs reinforced
with old steel rails and of abutments and wing walls reinforced with old
rods, bars or angles selected from junk. This junk metal cost 0.6 cts.
per pound and the rails cut to length cost 1.15 cts. per pound f. o. b.
cars. The work was done by a special gang, the men receiving $1.50 per
day and board. As a rule the footings were made 2 ft. wide and as high
as need be to get above the water and dirt. Before the footing concrete
set steel rods, bars or angles were placed; they were long enough to
reach the height of the wall and 3 to 6 ins. into the slab. The forms
for the abutment and wing walls and for the floor slab were then erected
complete before any more concrete was placed. No carpenter was employed,
every man on the job having been taught to take his certain place in the
work, then, the forms being erected, every man had his particular place
in the work of mixing and placing the concrete. The foreman saw that the
reinforcement was properly placed and watched over the accuracy of the
work generally. The concrete was allowed to set on the centers for from
30 to 40 days; the other form work was taken down after three days and
travel over the bridge permitted after three or four days. The concrete
was mixed wet. The bridge whose cost is given was 22 ft. wide and 16 ft.
span with 2-ft. wing walls.

The foundations are 4 ft. deep and 2½ ft. wide. The walls on top of the
foundations are 7 ft. high, 18 ins. wide at the base, and battered up to
14 ins. at the top for wings and 12 ins. at top for walls. The floor is
22 ft. by 18 ft. and 1 ft. thick. The wheel guard is 12 ins. thick by 14
ins. wide and 32 ft. long. The itemized cost of this bridge, containing
73 cu. yds. of concrete, is as follows:

Materials.                                       Total.   Per cu. yd.
70 cu. yds. gravel at 70 cts                   $ 49.00      $0.6726
10 cu. yds. broken stone at 70 cts                7.00       0.0959
75 bbls. cement at $2.20                        165.00       2.2603
7,000 lbs. steel rails at 1.15 cts               80.50       1.1027
1,000 lbs. junk rails at 0.6 cts                  6.00       0.0819
200 ft. B. M. lumber wasted at $29                5.80       0.0794
15 lbs. nails at 3 cts                            0.45       0.0061

Labor and Supplies:
2 days excavation at $14                         28.00       0.3835
¾ day foundation at $14                          10.00       0.1369
1½ days building forms at $14                    21.00       0.2876
2 days filling forms at $14                      28.00       0.3835
Hauling lumber and tools                          8.00       0.1096
Hauling cement and tools                         18.00       0.2465
Taking off forms                                  2.30       0.0315
1,000 lbs. coal at $4 per ton                     2.00       0.0274
                                                ------      -------
Total cost                                     $431.05      $5.9054

In round figures the cost per cubic yard of concrete in the finished
bridge was $5.90. Summarizing we have the following cost per cubic yard
of concrete in place:

Item.                       Per cu. yd.
Cement                         $2.26
Steel                           1.22
Lumber                          0.22
Gravel and stone                0.76
Labor                           1.41
Coal                            0.03
                               -----
Total                          $5.90

The average cost of concrete in place for all the work done in Greene
County by day labor was $6.25 per cu. yd. In the job itemized above the
bank caved in, causing an extra expense for removing the earth. The
gravel used in this bridge was very good clean river gravel.

~METHOD AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING TWO HIGHWAY GIRDER BRIDGES.~--The
following account of the methods and costs of constructing two slab and
beam highway bridge decks on old masonry abutments is taken from
records kept by Mr. Daniel J. Hauer. The first bridge was a single span
15 ft. long that replaced wooden stringers and floor that had become
unsafe; the second was two short spans of a steel bridge that was too
light for the traffic of the road, and it was torn down and moved
elsewhere, by the county authorities. The work was done by contract, and
in each case consisted of building the reinforced floor and girders on
the old masonry walls that were in good condition. While the work was
going on traffic was turned off the bridges, fords being used instead.
Figure 154 shows a sketch of the cross-section of the floor and girders.
In Example I the girders had a depth below the floor of 12 ins. and were
of the same width. In Example II the girders were 14 ins. wide and had a
depth below the floor of 18 ins. The floors on both bridges were 6 ins.
thick. Kahn bars were used for reinforcement.

[Illustration: Fig. 154.--Cross-Section of Concrete Girder Bridge.]

_Example I._--This bridge was but little more than 5 ft. above the
stream, which was shallow and not over 7 ft. wide, unless swollen by
floods. The bottom for several hundred feet on either side of the bridge
was covered with coarse sand and gravel, that had pebbles in it from the
size of a goose egg down. This was taken from the stream by men with
picks and shovels and hauled to the site of the work with wheelbarrows,
and then screened so as to separate the gravel from the sand. As it was
found that the sand was so coarse that it would take more cement than
the specifications called for in a 1-2½-5 mixture, some much finer sand
was bought and mixed with it. For the privilege of taking the sand from
the stream $1 was paid the property owner. This was done to get a
receipt and release from him, rather than as an attempt to pay royalty
on the gravel and sand. This dollar is included in the cost of the labor
in getting these materials.

The cost of materials per cubic yard for the bridge was as given below,
the mixture being as stated above. The cement cost $1.40 per barrel,
delivered at the bridge.

                               Per Cu. Yd.
Steel                             $2.50
Gravel and sand                     .75
Sand (bought)                       .30
Cement                             1.57
                                  -----
Per cubic yard                    $5.12

It is of interest to note the cost of the gravel and sand, as this
includes the cost of digging it, wheeling it in a wheelbarrow an average
distance of 100 ft., and then screening it and putting it in two stock
piles. The proportion of bought sand used with the creek sand was
one-half.

The old wooden floor and stringers had to be torn down. This was done at
a cost of $1.30 per M. ft. B. M., and furnished 60 per cent. of the
lumber needed for forms. The floor boards were 3-in. yellow pine planks,
and the stringers 6×12-in. timbers, rather heavy, but money was saved by
using them. The 6×12-in. timbers were used for props for the centering.
Additional lumber was bought, delivered at the site of the bridge, for
$20.84 per M. ft. B. M.

In framing and erecting the forms the carpenter had laborers helping
him, he doing only carpenter's work, the laborers carrying and lifting
all pieces wherever possible. The carpenter's work was about 40 per
cent. of the total labor cost, which was as follows per cubic yard of
concrete:

Tearing down old bridge            $0.08
Lumber                               .85
Nails                                .15
Labor, carpenter                     .77
Labor, laborers                      .96
                                   -----
                                   $2.81

The forms were torn down by laborers, with the assistance of a man and
his helper, who were given the boards for this labor and to haul them
away. This reduced this item somewhat, as it only amounted to 20 cts.
per cu. yd.

The cost of the forms per thousand feet board measure was:

New lumber                        $20.82
Nails                               1.44
Labor, carpenter                    7.60
Labor, laborers                     9.50
Tearing down                        2.00
                                  ------
                                  $41.36

All the men, including the carpenter, worked 10 hours per day, and were
paid at the following rates:

Carpenter                           $2.50
Sub-foreman                          2.00
Laborers                             1.50

A regular foreman was not employed, but an intelligent and handy workman
was given 50 cts. additional to lead the men and look after them when
the contractor was not present.

A gang of six men did the work of mixing and placing, and as the stock
piles were close by the mixing board no extra men were needed to handle
materials. Water was secured from the stream in buckets for mixing. The
mixture was made very wet. The cost per cubic yard for the entire
structure was as follows:

Preparing for mixing               $0.04
Cleaning out forms                   .06
Handling steel                       .03
Mixing and placing                  1.15
Ramming                              .23
                                   -----
                                   $1.51

The cost of the contractor's expense of bidding, car fare, etc., is
listed under general expense, and gives a total cost per cubic yard of:

Materials                         $ 5.12
Erecting forms                      2.81
Tearing down forms                   .20
Labor                               1.51
General expense                     2.00
                                  ------
                                  $11.64

_Example II._--For this bridge both the stone and sand had to be bought.
The bridge floor was nearly 14 ft. above the bottom of the stream, which
was shallow. The wages paid were as follows for a 10-hour day:

Foreman                            $3.00
Laborers                            1.50

Carpenters were paid $3 for an 8-hour day and time and a half for all
overtime, which they frequently made.

For the girders a 1-2-4 mixture was used. The cement, delivered at the
bridge, cost $1.21 per barrel, there being 8 cts. a barrel storage and 8
cts. a barrel for hauling included in this. The sand was paid for at an
agreed price per cartload delivered, which averaged $1.34 per cu. yd.
The stone was crushed so as to pass a 1½-in. ring in all directions. It
was delivered at the bridge for $2.75 per cu. yd. This makes the cost
per cubic yard for materials as follows:

Steel                              $1.41
Cement                              2.18
Sand                                 .67
Stone                               2.75
                                   -----
                                   $7.01

For the floor a 1-3-5 mixture was used, making a cost for material of:

Steel                              $1.02
Cement                              1.69
Sand                                 .67
Stone                               2.75
                                   -----
                                   $6.13

Two-inch rough pine boards were used to make the troughs for the
girders, while 1-in. rough boards were used for the floors. These were
all supported by 3×4-in. pine scantlings. This lumber cost delivered
$17.50 per M. ft. B. M. Carpenters did all the framing, and erected it
with the help of laborers. All the carrying of the lumber was done by
laborers. This reduced the cost of the work, as the laborers' wages
amounted to one-third of the whole cost. As soon as the forms were all
in place, which was before the mixing of concrete commenced, the
carpenters were discharged. The cost per cubic yard for forms was:

Lumber                      $2.82
Nails                         .05
Labor, carpenters            1.24
Laborers                      .62
                            -----
                            $4.73

The tearing down of the forms was done entirely by laborers at a cost of
61 cts. per cu. yd.

On concrete work it is also advisable to keep the cost of forms per
thousand feet board measure, so as to have such data for estimating on
new work. The cost per M. ft. on this job was:

Lumber                      $17.50
Nails                          .30
Labor, carpenters             7.65
Laborers                      3.85
Tearing down                  3.80
                             ------
                            $33.10

The concrete was mixed by hand, water being carried in buckets from the
creek. Ten to twelve men were worked in the gang under a foreman, and
the concrete was wheeled from the mixing board to the forms in
wheelbarrows. The mixture was made wet enough to run. The cost per cubic
yard for the girders in detail was as follows:

Foreman                                $0.41
Preparing for mixing                    0.14
Cleaning out forms                      0.07
Handling materials                      0.30
Handling and placing steel              0.40
Mixing and placing                      0.87
Ramming                                 0.45
                                       -----
                                       $2.64

The cost of labor for the floor was:

Foreman                              $0.28
Preparing for mixing                  0.08
Cleaning out forms                    0.05
Handling materials                    0.14
Handling and placing steel            0.08
Mixing and placing                    0.87
Ramming                               0.36
                                     -----
                                     $1.86

This gives a total cost per cubic yard for the concrete in the girders
in the completed bridge as follows:

Materials                        $ 7.01
Erecting forms                     4.73
Tearing down forms                 0.61
Labor                              2.57
General expense                    1.60
                                 ------
                                 $16.52

The cost per cubic yard for the floor was:

Materials                        $ 6.13
Erecting forms                     4.73
Tearing down forms                 0.61
Labor                              1.86
General expense                    1.60
                                 ------
                                 $14.93

Included with this is an item for general expense, being expenses of the
contractor in bidding on the work, car fare, and other items of expense
in looking after the contract.

It will be noticed that a record is here given of three different
mixtures and that the labor cost of mixing and placing increases with
the richness of the mixture. This is because it takes a greater number
of batches to the cubic yard. Record has also been given of cost of
preparing the mixing board and other work necessary to start and clean
up each day; also when stock piles could not be arranged close to the
mixing board, of the cost of handling the materials. These items, it
will be noticed, are large enough to be considered in estimating on new
work. The cost of sweeping and cleaning out the forms has also been
listed, as this work is extremely important.

The cost of the reinforcing steel is given in with the materials, but
the labor of handling it and placing it in the forms is listed under
labor. This naturally varies with the amount of steel needed, and with
the Kahn bar it will vary from 10 cts. to 75 cts. per cubic yard, as the
prongs of the bar must be bent into proper position and at times
straightened, when bent in shipment. This cost seems large, but it is
done with the ordinary labor, while with round rods a large amount of
blacksmith work has to be done and a smith and his helper frequently
must place them. The patent bars are all lettered and numbered as
structural steel is, and can be placed under the direction of the
foreman.

One striking lesson can be learned from the forming. It will be noticed
that the cost for common labor for handling and helping to erect the
forms was much larger in Example I than in Example II, although the
bridge was higher in the latter instance. This was caused by the heavy
timber that was used, and equaled an extra cost nearly 50 per cent. of
the price of new lumber. It certainly speaks volumes against the use of
unnecessarily heavy timber for concrete forms.

In bridge work the height of the floor above the stream to some extent
governs the cost of the forms. This is made so by the extra lumber
needed as props or falsework to support the forming, and also by the
fact that men at some height above the ground do not work as quickly or
as readily as they do nearer the ground. For high and long spans a
derrick is sometimes needed for the work of placing the centering.

On these jobs the concrete was made so wet that with the proper tamping
and cutting of the concrete in the forms the surfaces were so smooth
that no plastering was needed.

~MOLDING SLABS FOR GIRDER BRIDGES.~--The bridges carry railway tracks
across intersecting streets; the slabs rest on two abutments and three
rows of columns so that there are two 24¼-ft. spans over the street
roadway and one 10¾-ft. span over each sidewalk. The larger slabs were
24 ft. 3 ins. long, 33 ins. thick and 7 ft. wide; each contained 16¾
cu. yds. of concrete and weighed 36¾ tons. The smaller slabs were 10 ft.
9 ins. long, 17 ins. thick and 7 ft. wide; each contained 3.65 cu. yds.
of concrete and weighed 7.8 tons. The weights were found by actual
weighing. They make the weight of the reinforced slab between 160 and
162 lbs. per cu. ft. The concrete was generally 1 part cement and 4
parts pit gravel. The reinforcement consisted of corrugated bars. The
method of molding was as follows:

[Illustration: Fig. 155.--Arrangement of Tracks and Forms for Molding
Slabs for Girder Bridge.]

[Illustration: Fig. 156.--Form for Molding Slabs for Girder Bridge.]

A cinder fill yard was leveled off and tamped, then the forms were set
up on both sides of two lines of railway track arranged as shown by Fig.
155. The exact construction of the forms for one of the larger slabs is
shown by Fig. 156. The side and end pieces were so arranged as to be
easily taken down and erected for repeated use. About 100 floors were
used and they had to be leveled up each time used as the lifting of the
hardened slab disarranged them. The side and end pieces were removed in
about a week or ten days, but the slabs stood on the floor 90 days,
being wetted each day for two weeks after molding.

The plant for mixing and handling the concrete was mounted on cars. A
flat car had a rotary drum mixer mounted on a platform at its forward
end. Beneath the mixer was a hopper provided with a deflector which
directed the concrete to right or left as desired. Under the hopper were
the ends of two inclined chutes extending out sidewise beyond the
car--one to the right and one to the left--and over the slab molds on
each side. Above the mixer was another platform containing a charging
hopper, and from the rear of this platform an incline ran down to the
rear end of the car and then down to the track rails. A car loaded with
cement and gravel in the proper proportions was hauled up the incline by
cable operated by the mixer engine, until it came over the topmost
hopper into which it was dumped. This hopper directed the charge into
the mixer below; the mixer discharged its batch into the hopper beneath
from which it flowed right or left as desired into one of the chutes and
thence into the mold. The chutes reached nearly the full length of the
molds and discharged as desired over the ends into the far end of the
mold or through a trap over the end of the mold nearest the car.

To the rear of the mixer car came a cement car provided with a platform
overhanging its forward end. Two hoppers were set in this platform each
holding a charge for one batch. Coupled behind the cement cars came
three or four gravel cars. These were gondola cars and plank runways
were laid along their top outer edges making a continuous runway for
wheelbarrows on each side from rear of train to front of cement car. The
sand and gravel were wheeled to the two measuring hoppers and the cement
was handed up from the car below and added, the charge was then
discharged into the dump car below and the car was hauled up the incline
to the mixer as already described. Two measuring hoppers were used so
that one was being filled while the other was emptied, thus making the
work continuous.

The molding gang consisted of 33 laborers, two foremen and one
engineman. This gang averaged 7 of the large slabs per 10-hour day and
at times made as many as 9 slabs. When molding small slabs an average
of 12 were made per day. This record includes all delays, moving train,
switching gravel cars on and off, building runways, etc. The
distribution of the men was about as follows:

Handling Materials:                           No. Men.

Shoveling gravel into wheelbarrows                9
Wheeling gravel to measuring hoppers              9
Emptying cement into measuring hoppers            2
Handling cement to men emptying                   1
In charge of loading dump car                     1
On top of cement car                              1
Sub-foreman in charge                             1

Mixing and Placing:

Engineer                                          1
In charge of mixer                                1
Hoeing and spreading in mold                      2
Spading in mold                                   2
Finishing sides of block                          2
General laborers                                  3
Foreman in charge                                 1
                                                 --
Total men                                        36

This gang mixed and placed concrete for 7 blocks or 117¼ cu. yds. of
concrete per day. Assuming an average wage of $2 per day the cost of
labor mixing and placing was 61.4 cts. per cu. yd. or $10.28 per slab.
It is stated that the slabs cost $11.80 per cu. yd. on storage pile.
This includes labor and materials (concrete and steel); molds; loading
into cars with locomotive crane, hauling cars to storage yard and
unloading with crane into storage piles, and inspection, incidentals,
etc. To load the slabs into cars from storage piles, transport them to
the work and place them in position is stated to have cost $2 per cu.
yd. The slabs were placed by means of a locomotive crane being swung
from the flat cars directly into place.

[Illustration: Fig. 157.--Sections Showing Construction of Connecticut
Ave. Bridge.]

~METHOD AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING CONNECTICUT AVE. BRIDGE, WASHINGTON, D.
C.~--The Connecticut Ave. Bridge at Washington, D. C., consists of nine
150-ft. spans and two 82-ft. spans, one at each end, all full centered
arches of mass concrete trimmed with tool-dressed concrete blocks.
Figure 157 is a part sectional plan and elevation of the bridge,
showing both the main and spandrel arch construction. This bridge is one
of the largest concrete arch bridges in the world, being 1,341 ft. long
and 52 ft. wide, and containing 80,000 cu. yds. of concrete. Its total
cost was $850,000 or $638.85 per lin. ft., or $10.63 per cu. yd. of
masonry. It was built by contract, with Mr. W. J. Douglas as engineer in
charge of construction. The account of the methods and cost of
construction given here has been prepared from information obtained from
Mr. Douglas and by personal visits to the work during construction.

_General Arrangement of the Plant._--The quarry from which the crushed
stone for concrete was obtained was located in the side of the gorge at
a point about 400 ft. from the bridge. Incidentally, it may be added,
the fact that the contractor had an option on this quarry gave him an
advantage of some $30,000 over the other bidders. The stone from the
quarry was hoisted about 50 ft. by derricks and deposited in cars which
traveled on an incline to a Gates gyratory crusher, into which they
dumped automatically. The stone from the crusher dropped into a 600-cu.
yd. bin under the bottom of which was a tunnel large enough for a dump
car and provided with top gates by which the stone above could be
dropped into the cars. The cars were hauled by cable to the mixer
storage bin and there discharged. Sand was brought in by wagons and
dumped onto a platform about 50 ft. higher than the bottom of the main
stone bin. A tunnel exactly similar to that under the stone bin was
carried under the sand storage platform. The sand car was hauled from
this tunnel by cable to the mixer storage bin using the same cable as
was used for the stone cars, the cable being shifted by hand as was
desired. Cement was delivered to the mixer platform from the crest of
the bluff by means of a bag chute.

The mixer used was one of the Hains gravity type. It had four drops and
was provided with four mixing hoppers at the top. The concrete was made
quite wet. The proportions of sand and water were varied to suit the
stone according to its wetness and the percentage of dust carried by it.
The head mixer regulated the proportions and his work was checked by the
government inspector. From the bottom hopper the mixed concrete dropped
into a skip mounted on a car.

[Illustration: Fig. 158.--Center for Connecticut Ave. Bridge
(Elevation).]

To distribute the skip cars along the work a trestle was built close
alongside the bridge and at about springing line level. This trestle had
a down grade of about 2 per cent. from the mixer. Derricks mounted along
the centering and on the block molding platform lifted the skips from
the cars and deposited them where the concrete was wanted. The skip
cars were large enough for three skips but only two were carried so
that the derricks could save time by depositing an empty skip in the
vacant space and take a loaded skip away with one full swing of the
boom. Altogether nine derricks were used in the bridge, four having
70-ft. booms and five having 90-ft. booms. These derricks were jacked up
as the work progressed.

[Illustration: Fig. 158.--Center for Connecticut Ave. Bridge
(Details).]

_Forms and Centers._--The forms for wall and pier work consisted of
1-in. lagging held in place by studs about 2 ft. on centers and they in
turn supported by wales which were connected through the walls by bolts,
the outer portions of which were removed when the forms were taken down.

The centers for the five 150-ft. arches were all erected at one time;
those for the 82-ft. arches were erected separately. The seven centers
required 1,500,000 ft. B. M. of lumber or 1,404 ft. B. M. per lineal
foot of bridge between abutments, or 1,640 ft. B. M. per lineal foot of
arch span. The centers for the main arch spans are shown in detail by
Fig. 158; this drawing shows the sizes of all members and the maximum
stresses to which they were subjected from the loading indicated, that
is the arch ring concrete. The centers as a rule rested on pile
foundations. Four piles to each post were used for the intermediate
posts and two piles for the posts in the two rows next the piers.
Concrete foundations, however, were put in Rock Creek and on the line of
Woodley Lane Bridge where it was impracticable to drive piles. As
considerable difficulty was experienced in driving the piles, the ground
consisting mostly of rotten rock, it is thought that it would have cost
less if the contractor had used concrete footings throughout.

Some of the costs of form work and centering are given. The cost of
lumber delivered at the bridge site was about as follows:

                                          M. ft. B. M.
Rough Virginia pine                         $25
Dressed Virginia pine lagging                23
Rough Georgia, sizes up to 12×12 ins.        33
Rough Georgia, sizes over 12×12 ins.         35
Rough oak lumber                             35

The following wages were paid: Foreman carpenter, $3.50; carpenters, $2
to $3; laborers, $1.70, with a few at $1.50. An 8-hour day was worked.

The cost, of formwork is given in summary as follows:

Lagging per M. ft. (used twice):
Lumber at $23                            $11.50
Erection                                  15.00
                                         ------
Total cost erected                       $26.50

Studding and rough boards used in place of lagging per M. ft. (used twice):

Lumber at $25                          $12.50
Erection                                10.00
                                       ------
Total cost erected                     $22.50

Wales per M. ft. (used six times):

Lumber at $36                          $ 6.00
Erection                                10.00
                                       ------
Total cost erected                     $16.00

The total cost of the main arch span centers to the District of Columbia
was $54,000 or $59 per lineal foot of arch span, or $37.33 per M. ft. B.
M. The cost of center erection and demolition was as follows:

Erection below springing line per M. ft.        $15
Erection above springing line per M. ft.         25
Demolition                                        5

The salvage on the centers amounted to $11 per M. ft. B. M.

The spandrel arch centers were each used twice and cost per M. ft. B. M.
for

Lumber at $25 per M. ft.            $12.50
Erecting at $25 per M. ft.           25.00
Moving at $5 per M. ft.               5.00
Total per M ft.                      42.50

_Molding Concrete Blocks._--The bridge is trimmed throughout with molded
concrete blocks, comprising belt courses, quoin stones, chain stones,
ring stones, brackets and dentils. The blocks were made of a 1-2-4½
concrete faced with a 1-3 mixture of Dragon Portland cement and
bluestone screenings from 3/8-in. size to dust. They were cast in wooden
molds with collapsible sides held together by iron rods. Each mold was
provided with six bottoms so that the molded block could be left
standing on the bottom to harden while the side pieces were being used
for molding another block. The molding was done on a perfectly level and
tight floor on mud sills, the perfect level of the molding platform
having been found to be an important factor in securing a uniform
casting. The blocks were molded with the principal showing face down and
the secondary showing faces vertical. The facing mortar was placed
first and then the concrete backing. Care was taken to tamp the concrete
so as to force the concrete stone into but not through the facing. Mr.
Douglas remarks that the back of the block should always be at the top
in molding since the laitance or slime always flushes to the surface
making a weak skin which will develop hair cracks. In this work the
backs of the blocks were mortised by embedding wooden cubes in the wet
concrete and removing them when the concrete had set. These mortises
bonded the blocks with the mass concrete backing. The blocks were left
to harden for at least 30 days and preferably for 60 days and were then
bush hammered on the showing faces, some of the work being done by hand
and some with pneumatic tools.

Some precautions necessary in the molding and handling of large concrete
blocks were discovered in this work and merit mention. In designing
blocks for molding it is necessary to avoid thin flanges or the flanges
will crack and break off; blocks molded with a 2¼ in. flange projecting
1¾ ins. gave such trouble from cracking on this work that a flange 5
ins. thick was substituted. Provide for the method of handling the block
so that dog or lewis holes will not come in the showing faces. Dog holes
can be made with a pick when the concrete is three or four weeks old.
When it is not practicable to use dogs, two-pin lewises can be used. The
lewis holes should be cast in the block and should be of larger size
than for granite; they should not be located too near the mortar faces.
In turning blocks it is necessary to provide some sort of cushion for
them to turn on or broken arrises will result. When the work will
permit, it is desirable to round the arrises to about a 3/8-in. radius.

The following general figures of the cost of block work are available.
Foreman cutters were paid $5 per day; foreman concrete workers $3 per
day; stonecutters $4 per day; concrete laborers $1.70 per day, and
common laborers $1.50 to $1.70 per day. Plain and ornamental blocks cost
about the same, the large size of the ornamental blocks bringing down
the cost. The following is given as the average cost of block work per
cubic yard:

Cement                                                         $ 1.95
Sand                                                             0.35
Stone                                                            1.14
Forms, lumber and making                                         0.80
Mixing and placing concrete                                      1.50
Dressing                                                         4.73
Handling and setting                                             2.00
Superintendence, plant, incidentals at 25 per cent.              3.12
Condemnation at 5 per cent.                                      0.78
                                                               ------
Total cost blocks in place                                     $16.37

It will be seen that the largest single item in the above summary of
costs is the item of dressing. This was done, as stated above, partly by
hand and partly by pneumatic tools. Hand tooling cost about twice as
much as machine tooling, but its appearance was generally better. The
average cost of tooling the several forms of blocks is shown by Table
XIX. For 42,190 sq. ft. the average cost was 26 cts. per sq. ft. or
$2.34 per sq. yd., or $4.73 per cu. yd. of block work. This tooling was
done by stone cutters, and was unusually high in cost.

_Mass Concrete Work._--All parts of the bridge except the molded block
trim were built of concrete deposited in place. Briefly, the molded
blocks were set first and then backed up with the mass concrete
deposited in forms and on centers. The only features of this work that
call for particular description are those in connection with the main
arch ring and the spandrel arch construction.

The main arch rings were concreted in transverse sections; Fig. 158
shows the size and order of construction of these sections. Back forms
were necessary up to an angle of 45° from the spring line after which
the concrete was made somewhat drier and back forms were not used. After
Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4 had been concreted they were allowed to set and
then the struts and back forms were taken out and the intervening
sections were concreted. The large Sections 6 and 7 were concreted in
five sections each, in order to permit the taking out of the timber
struts supporting the sections above. The concrete in all sections was
placed in horizontal layers as a rule and it is the judgment of the
engineers in charge of this work that this is the preferable method.


TABLE XIX.--SHOWING COST OF TOOLING CONCRETE ORNAMENTAL BLOCKS FOR
CONNECTICUT AVENUE BRIDGE.

===============================================================================
                         |                   |  Per Superficial Foot of
                         |  Per Cubic Foot.  |     Showing Face.
                         +------+-----+------+-----+------+------+------+------
   DESCRIPTION. |      | Num-|      |     |      |      |      |Number
                         |      | ber |      |     |Super-|      |Cost  |super.
1: 2: 4½ Concrete Backing| Total|cubic|Total |Cost |ficial|Total |per   |ft. to
1: 3 (Mortar Face).      |Number|feet |cubic |per  | feet |super-|super-|  one
                         |Stones|in   | feet |cubic|  in  |ficial|ficial| cubic
                         | Cut. |each.| cut. |foot.| each.| feet.|foot. | foot.
-------------------------+------+-----+------+-----+------+------+------+------
Brackets under Lamps and |      |     |      |     |      |      |      |
Rail Posts (Cap and Base)|   344| 16.0| 5,500|$0.27| 10.5 | 3,630|$0.41 | 0.66
Moulding under coping    |   770|  5.9| 4,560| 0.30|  3.8 | 2,930| 0.47 | 0.64
Dentils between Moulding |   520|  5.5| 2,860| 0.20|  8.0 | 4,160| 0.14 | 1.45
Coping                   |   494| 61.2|30,220| 0.12| 35.4 |17,490| 0.21 | 0.58
Pedestal (3 courses)     |   162| 27.2| 4,400| 0.15| 14.1 | 2,290| 0.29 | 0.52
Rail Posts (Top and Base)|   296|  7.1| 2,100| 0.50| 17.3 | 5,100| 0.21 | 2.43
Lamp Posts and Parapets  |      |     |      |     |      |      |      |
over Piers (Top and Base)|   248| 22.9| 5,690| 0.17| 26.5 | 6,580| 0.15 | 1.16
-------------------------+------+-----+------+-----+------+------+------+------
Average of above--Totals | 2,834| 19.5|55,330|$0.17| 14.8 |43,190|$0.26 | 0.77
-------------------------+------+-----+------+-----+------+------+------+------


TABLE XX.--SHOWING COST OF MASS CONCRETE WORK PER CUBIC YARD.

[Transcriber's note: Table split]

===========================================================================
                   |        |         |    Cost Delivered     |           |
                   |        |         |        on Mixer.      |           |
Description.       |        |         +--------+------+-------+           |
                   |        | Average |        |      |       |           |
                   |        | Yardage |        |      |       |           |
                   | Propor-| for Days|        |      |       | Total     |
                   |  tions.| Run.    | Cement.| Sand.| Stone.| Materials.|
-------------------+--------+---------+--------+------+-------+-----------+
Class A, in Piers  | 1:2:4½ |   150   |  1.65  | 0.39 |  1.08 |  3.12     |
Class A, in Arches | 1:2:4½ |   200   |  1.65  | 0.39 |  1.08 |  3.11     |
Class B, in Piers  |        |         |        |      |       |           |
  --Solid Work     | 1:3:6  |   160   |  1.40  | 0.42 |  1.23 |  3.05     |
Class B, in Piers  |        |         |        |      |       |           |
  --Hollow Work    | 1:3:6  |   110   |  1.40  | 0.42 |  1.23 |  3.05     |
Class B, in        |        |         |        |      |       |           |
Spandrel Walls     | 1:3:6  |   110   |  1.40  | 0.42 |  1.23 |  3.05     |
Class B, in        |        |         |        |      |       |           |
Spandrel Arches    | 1:3:6  |   200   |  1.40  | 0.42 |  1.23 |  3.05     |
Class B,           |        |         |        |      |       |           |
in Abutments       | 1:3:6  |   150   |  1.40  | 0.42 |  1.23 |  3.05     |
Class C, Filling   |        |         |        |      |       |           |
over Bridge        | 1:3:10 |   145   |  0.90  | 0.31 |  1.30 |  2.51     |
-------------------+--------+---------+--------+------+-------+-----------+

===============================================
                   |        Cost of           |
                   |   Mixing  and Placing.   |
Description.       +--------+--------+--------+
                   |        |        | Total  |
                   |        |        | Mixing |
                   |        |        |  and   |
                   | Mixing.| Placing| Placing|
-------------------+--------+--------+--------+
Class A, in Piers  |  0.09  |  0.21  |  0.30  |
                   |        |        |        |
Class A, in Arches |  0.05  |  0.28  |  0.33  |
Class B, in Piers  |        |        |        |
  --Solid Work     |  0.09  |  0.18  |  0.27  |
Class B, in Piers  |        |        |        |
  --Hollow Work    |  0.11  |  0.36  |  0.47  |
Class B, in        |        |        |        |
Spandrel Walls     |  0.11  |  0.40  |  0.51  |
Class B, in        |        |        |        |
Spandrel Arches    |  0.07  |  0.26  |  0.33  |
Class B,           |        |        |        |
in Abutments       |  0.11  |  0.24  |  0.35  |
Class C, Filling   |        |        |        |
over Bridge        |  0.11  |  0.28  |  0.39  |
-------------------+--------+--------+--------+


=========================================================================
                   |        Cost of Form Work.             |             |
Description.       +----------+-------+--------+-----------+-------------+
                   |          | Taking|        | Total     | Total Cost  |
                   | Erecting.| Down  | Lumber.| Form Work | per Yard.[G]|
-------------------+----------+-------+--------+-----------+-------------+
Class A, in Piers  |  0.17    |  0.05 |  0.16  |  0.38     |  $3.80      |
                   |          |       |        |           |             |
Class A, in Arches |  0.08    |  0.03 |  0.10  |  0.21     |   3.66      |
Class B, in Piers  |          |       |        |           |             |
  --Solid Work     |  0.17    |  0.05 |  0.16  |  0.38     |   3.70      |
Class B, in Piers  |          |       |        |           |             |
  --Hollow Work    |  0.77    |  0.25 |  0.64  |  1.66     |   5.18      |
Class B, in        |          |       |        |           |             |
Spandrel Walls     |  0.85    |  0.28 |  0.73  |  1.86     |   5.42      |
Class B, in        |          |       |        |           |             |
Spandrel Arches    |  0.94    |  0.30 |  0.86  |  2.10     |   5.48      |
Class B,           |          |       |        |           |             |
in Abutments       |  0.10    |  0.03 |  0.12  |  0.25     |   3.65      |
Class C, Filling   |          |       |        |           |             |
over Bridge        |  0.00    |  0.00 |  0.00  |  ....     |   2.90      |
-------------------+----------+-------+--------+-----------+-------------+

[Footnote G: Add 25% to the cost here tabulated for superintendence,
plant and incidentals.]

Considerable difficulty was experienced in building the large arches
with a concrete block facing on account of the fact that the edges of
the blocks are liable to chip off when any concentrated pressure is
brought on them. In order to permit the ring of blocks to deform as the
centering settled under its load, sheet lead was placed in the joints
between blocks at the points corresponding with the construction joints
between sections of the mass concrete backing. The deflection of the
centers at the crown was a maximum of 3¼ ins. and a minimum of 2½ ins.


TABLE XXI--Detail Cost of Engineering and Inspection for Different
Classes of Work.

                                       Engineering.        Inspection.
Kind of Work.                        Total.   Unit.     Total.     Unit.
Class A, concrete, 23,500 cu. yds   $3,055.00 $0.13    $1,762.50  $0.075
Class B, concrete, 36,580 cu. yds    3,658.00  0.10     1,646.10   0.045
Class C, concrete, 2,150 cu. yds       107.50  0.05        53.75   0.025
Class D, concrete, 6,250 cu. yds     1,875.00  0.30     4,687.50   0.75
1,000 M. ft. B. M. centering         1,000.00  1.00       440.00   0.44
Cement, 73,000 barrels                 365.00  0.005      730.00   0.01
Earth filling, 50,000 cu. yds        1,000.00  0.02       500.00   0.01

The centering of the main arches was not struck until the spandrel
arches and all the work above the main arches to the bottom of the
coping had been completed. The first and third spandrel arch on each
side of the piers was made with an expansion joint in the crown. To
permit further of the adjustment of the portion of the masonry above the
backs of the main arches, the crown of the middle arch of each set of
spandrel arches was left unconcreted until the center of the main arches
had been struck. It may be noted here that the expansion joints in the
first and third arches were carried up through the dentils and coping,
and observations show that these joints are about 1/8 in. larger in
winter than in summer.

The cost of the mass concrete work is shown in Table XX. These figures
are based on the wages already quoted and the following: Foreman
riggers, $4.50; riggers, $1.50 to $1.75 and $2; skilled laborers, $2;
engineers, $3.50. The detail cost of engineering and inspection is shown
in Table XXI.

~ARCH BRIDGES, ELKHART, IND.~--At the new Elkhart, Ind., yards of the Lake
Shore & Michigan Southern Ry. the tracks are carried over a city street
by concrete arches 40, 60 and 160 ft. long. These arches all have a span
of 30 ft., a height of 13 ft. and a ring thickness at crown of 28 ins.
The reinforcement consists of arch and transverse bars; the arch bars
are spaced 6 ins. on centers 2½ ins. from both extrados and intrados,
and the transverse bars are spaced 24 ins. on centers inside both lines
of arch bars. The proportions of the concrete were generally 1 cement, 3
gravel and 6 stone. The gravel was a material dug from the foundations
and was about 50 per cent. sand and 50 per cent. gravel, ranging up to
the size of pigeons' eggs. The concrete was machine mixed and was mixed
very wet.

The work was done by the railway company's forces, and Mr. Samuel
Rockwell, Assistant Chief Engineer, gives the following figures of cost:

                                                Total.    Per cu. yd.
Temporary buildings, trestles, etc.           $  752.33         $0.15
Machinery, pipe fittings, etc.                   416.34          0.08
Sheet piling and boxing                        1,006.12          0.21
Excavation and pumping                         1,619.74          0.33
Arch centers and boxing                        3,528.92          0.73
                                              ---------         -----
Total                                         $7,323.45         $1.50

Concrete masonry:
Cement                                         8,860.55          1.84
Stone                                          1,788.50          0.36
Sand                                             240.00          0.05
Drain tile                                       103.03          0.02
Labor                                          8,091.41          1.68
                                             ----------         -----
Total concrete                               $19,083.49         $3.95
Steel reinforcing rods                       $ 3,028.39         $0.63
Engineering, watching, etc.                      508.40          0.11
                                             ----------         -----
Grand total (4,833 cu. yds. concrete)        $29,943.73         $6.19

~ARCH BRIDGE, PLAINWELL, MICH.~--The following figures of cost of a
reinforced concrete arch bridge are given by Mr. P. A. Courtright. The
bridge crosses the Kalamazoo River at Plainwell, Mich., and is 446 ft.
long over all with seven arches of 54 ft. span and 8 ft. rise. The arch
rings were reinforced with 4-in., 6-lb. channels bent to a radius of 70
ft. and spaced 1.9 ft. c. to c. The contract price of the bridge was
$19,900.

The concrete was made of Portland cement and a natural mixture of sand
and gravel in the proportions of 1-8 for the foundations, 1-6 for arches
and spandrel walls and 1-4 for the parapet wall. The proportions were
determined by measure; the wagon boxes being built to hold a cubic yard
of sand and gravel. A sack of cement was taken as 1 cu. ft. For
foundations the pit mixture was used without screening; stones over 4
ins. in diameter being thrown out at the pit or on the mixing board. For
the arches and spandrel walls the gravel was passed over a 2-in. mesh
screen on the wagon box. The aggregate for the parapet walls was
screened to 1 in. largest diameter. The concrete was mixed in a McKelvey
continuous mixer which turned the material eight times. The mode of
procedure was as follows: The gravel was loaded upon wagons in the pit
and hauled to a platform at the intake of the mixer. Half of the cement
required in the concrete was then spread over the top of the load in the
wagon box and the whole was dumped through the bottom of the wagon box
onto the platform and spread with shovels. The remainder of the cement
was spread over the mixture and the whole was shoveled by one man to a
second man who shoveled it into the mixer. Water was added after the
mixture had passed about one-third of the way through the mixer. The
mixer delivered the concrete directly into wheelbarrows, by which it was
delivered to the work. The concrete was spread in layers from 2 to 4
ins. in thickness and thoroughly rammed with iron tampers; two men were
employed tamping for each man shoveling. The arches were concreted in
three longitudinal sections, each section constituting a day's work. The
work was done in 1903 and the concrete cost for mixing and placing:

Labor:                         Per day.     Per cu. yd.
13 men at $1.80                $23.40         $0.78
Engine and mixer                 5.00          0.17
1 team                           3.00          0.10
1 foreman                        3.00          0.10
                               ------         -----
Totals for labor               $34.40         $1.15

Materials:
0.65 bbl. cement at $2                        $1.30
0.9 cu. yd. gravel at $0.50                    0.45
                                              -----
Total for materials                           $1.75
Grand total                                   $2.90

~METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING A FIVE-SPAN ARCH BRIDGE.~--This bridge
consisted of five elliptical arch spans of 40, 45, 60, 87 and 44 ft.,
carried on concrete piers. The arch rings were 12 ins. thick at the
crowns and 18 ins. thick 5 ft. from the centers of piers and carried
4-in. spandrel walls; there were 1,000 cu. yds. of concrete in the
arches and 600 cu. yds. in the piers. Each arch ring was reinforced by a
grillage of longitudinal and transverse rods.

[Illustration: Fig. 159.--End View of Center for Short Elliptical Arch
Spans.]

_Forms and Centers._--Figure 159 is an end view of the center arch. It
consists of a series of bents, 6 ft. c. to c., the posts of each bent
being 5 ft. c. to c. These posts are made of 2×6-in. Washington fir.
Upon the heads of the posts rest 2×6-in. stringers, extending from bent
to bent. Resting on these stringers are wooden blocks, or wedges, which
support a series of cross-stringers, also of 2×6-in. stuff, spaced 2 ft.
c. to c. On top of these cross-stringers rest the sheeting planks,
which are 1×6-in. stuff, dressed on the upper side, and bent to the
curve of the arch. This sheeting plank was not tongue and grooved, and a
man standing under it, after it is nailed in place, could see daylight
through the cracks. It looked as if it would leak like a sieve, and let
much of the wet concrete mortar flow through the cracks, but, as a
matter of fact, scarcely any escapes. Figure 160 shows a front view of a
bent, and indicates the manner of sway bracing it with 1×4-in. stuff.
Figure 161 shows the outer forms for the parapet wall, or concrete hand
railing, and it will be noted that the cross-stringers are allowed to
project about 3 ft. so as to furnish a place to fasten the braces which
hold the upright studs. The inner forms for the parapet wall are shown
in dotted lines. They are not put in place until all the concrete arch
is built. Then they are erected and held to the outer forms by wire, and
are sway braced to wooden cleats nailed to the top surface of the
concrete arch.

[Illustration: Fig. 160.--Front View of Center for Short Elliptical Arch
Spans.]

[Illustration: Fig. 161.--Form for Parapet Wall for Arch Bridge.]

For the five spans the total amount of lumber in the centers was in
round figures 28 M. ft., distributed about as follows:

Item.                                         Ft. B. M.
1×6-in. sheeting                             5,600
2×6-in. longitudinal stringers               2,600
2×6-in. cross stringers                      2,600
2×6-in. posts                                4,000
3×8-in. sills                                1,500
1×4-in. braces                               3,000
Outer forms for spandrel walls               4,000
Inner forms for spandrel walls               4,000
                                            ------
Total                                       27,300

The aggregate span length of the arches was 276 ft., so that a little
less than 100 ft. B. M. of lumber was used for centering per lineal foot
of span. The superintendent at $5 per day and five carpenters at $3.50
per day erected the five centers in 18 days at a cost of $400, or a
trifle more than $14 per M. ft. B. M.; the cost of taking down the
centers was $2 per M. ft. B. M., and the lumber for the centers cost $24
per M. ft. B. M. making a grand total of $40 per M. ft. B. M. for
materials and labor. As there were 1,000 cu. yds. of concrete in the
arches and spandrels, the cost of centers and forms was $1.12 per cu.
yd. This form lumber was, however, after taking down, used again in
erecting a reinforced concrete building. Assuming that the lumber was
used only twice, the cost of centers and forms for these five arches was
less than 80 cts. per cu. yd. of concrete.

_Shaping and Placing Reinforcement._--The 60 and 87-ft. spans were
reinforced with 32 1½-in. round longitudinal rods held in place by
½-in. square transverse rods wired at the intersections; the
reinforcement of the smaller spans was exactly the same except that
1-in. diameter rods were used. To bend the longitudinal rods to curve,
planks were laid on the ground roughly to the curve of the arch; the
exact curve was marked on these planks and large spikes were driven part
way into the planks along this mark. The end of a rod was then fastened
by spiking it against the first projecting spike head and three men
taking hold of the opposite end and walking it around until the rod
rested against all the spikes on the curve. It took three men two 8-hour
days to bend 46,000 lbs. of rods. Their wages were $2.50 each per day,
making the cost of bending 0.03 ct. per pound, or 60 cts. per ton. It
took a man 5 mins. to wire a cross rod to a longitudinal rod. With wages
at $2.50 per day the cost of shaping and placing the reinforcement per
ton was as follows:

Item.                                  Per ton.
Bending rods                            $0.60
Shearing rods to lengths                 0.40
Carrying rods onto bridge                0.40
Placing and wiring rods                  2.35
                                        -----
Total                                   $3.75

Including superintendence the labor cost was practically $4 per ton, or
0.2 cts. per lb. Altogether 66,000 lbs. of steel was used for
reinforcing 1,000 cu. yds. of concrete, or 66 lbs. per cu. yd. The cost
of steel delivered was 2 cts. per lb., and the cost of shaping and
placing it 0.2 ct. per lb., a total of 2.2 cts. per lb. or 2.2 × 66 =
$1.45 per cu. yd. of concrete.

_Mixing and Placing Concrete._--A Ransome mixer holding a half-yard
batch was used. The mixer was driven by an electric motor. The concrete
for the piers was a mixture of 1 part Portland cement to 7 parts gravel;
for the arches, the concrete was mixed 1 to 5. The gravel was piled near
the mixer, a snatch team being used to assist the wagons in delivering
the gravel into a pile as high as possible. Run planks supported on
"horses" were laid horizontally from the mixer to the gravel, so that
big wheelbarrow loads could be handled. The barrows were loaded with
long-handled shovels, and the men worked with great vigor, as is shown
by the fact that four men, shoveling and wheeling, delivered enough
gravel to the mixer in 8 hrs. to make 100 cu. yds. of concrete. We have,
therefore, estimated on a basis of six men instead of four. The mixer
crew was organized as follows:

                                           Per day.
6 men shoveling and wheeling                 $12
2 men handling cement                          4
1 man handling water                           2
1 man dumping concrete                         2
2 men handling dump cars                       4
2 men handling hoisting rope                   4
4 men spreading and ramming concrete           8
1 engineman                                    4
1 foreman                                      5
Fuel, estimated                                3
                                             ---
Total                                        $48

The output of this crew was 100 cu. yds. per day. The concrete was
hauled from the mixer in two small dump cars, each having a capacity of
10 cu. ft. The average load in each car was ¼ cu. yd. Ordinary mine cars
were used, of the kind which can be dumped forward, or on either side.
The cars were hauled over tracks having a gage of 18 ins. The rails
weighed 16 lbs. per yard, and were held by spikes ¼×2½ ins. Larger
spikes would have split the cross-ties, which were 3×4 ins. Only one
spike was driven to hold each rail to each tie, the spikes being on
alternate sides of the rail in successive ties. No fish plates or splice
bars were used to join the rails, which considerably simplifies the
track laying.

[Illustration: Fig. 162.--Trestle for Service Track.]

Two lines of track were laid over the bridge. The tracks were supported
by light bents, the cross-tie forming the cap of each bent, as shown in
Fig. 162. The bents were spaced 3 ft. apart. There were two posts to
each bent, toe-nailed at the top of the tie, and at the bottom to the
arch sheeting plank. Two men framed these crude bents and laid the two
rails at the rate of 150 lin. ft. of track per day, at a cost of 4 cts.
per lin. ft. of track. As stated, there were two tracks, one on each
side of the bridge, but they converged as they neared the concrete
mixer, so that a car coming from either track could run under the
discharge chute of the mixer; Fig. 163 shows the arrangement of the
tracks at the mixer. The part of each rail from A to B (6 ft. long)
was free to move by bending at A, the rail being spiked rigidly to the
tie at A, leaving its end at B free to move. To move the end B, so
as to switch the cars, a home-made switch was improvised, as shown in
Figs. 163 and 164.

[Illustration: Fig. 163.--Arrangement of Service Tracks at Mixer.]

[Illustration: Fig. 164.--Improvised Switch for Service Cars, General
Plan.]

It will be remembered that this bridge was a series of five arches.
There was a steep grade from the two ends of the bridge to the crown of
the center arch. Hence the two railway tracks ascended on a steep grade
from the mixer for about 175 ft., then they descended rapidly to the
other end of the bridge. Hence to haul the concrete cars up the grade by
using a wire cable, it was necessary to anchor a snatch block at the
center of the bridge. This was done by erecting a short post, the top
of which was about a foot above the top of the rails. The post stood
near the track, and was guyed by means of wires, and braced by short
inclined struts. To the top of the post was lashed the snatch block
through which passed the wire rope. Fig. 165 shows this post, P. About
10 ft. from the post P, on the side toward the mixer, another post,
Q, was erected, and a snatch block fastened to it. When the hoisting
engine, which was set near the concrete mixer, began hauling the car
along the track, a laborer would follow the car. Just before the car
reached the post Q, he would unhook the hoisting rope from the front
end of the car, then push the car past the post Q, and hook the
hoisting rope to the rear of the car. The car would then proceed to
descend in the direction T, being always under the control of the wire
rope, except during the brief period when the car was passing the post
Q. Each of the two cars was provided with its own hoisting rope, and
one engineer, operating a double drum hoist, handled the cars. The hoist
was belted to an 8 HP. gasoline engine, no electric motor being
available for the purpose.

[Illustration: Fig. 165.--General Plan of Rope Haulage System.]

[Illustration: Fig. 166. Fig. 167. Details of Haulage Rope Guides.]

Where hauling is done in this manner with wire ropes, it is necessary to
support the ropes by rollers wherever they would rub against
obstructions. A cheap roller can be made by taking a piece of 2-in. gas
pipe about a foot long, and driving a wooden plug in each end of the gas
pipe. Then bore a hole through the center of the wooden plugs and drive
a 1-in. round rod through the holes, as shown in Fig. 166. The ends of
this rod are shoved into holes bored into plank posts, which thus
support the roller. Where the rope must be carried around a more or less
sharp corner, it is necessary to provide two rollers, one horizontal and
the other vertical, as shown in Fig. 167.

When conveying concrete to a point on the bridge about 300 ft. from the
mixer, a dump car would make the round trip in 3 mins., about ¼ min. of
its time being occupied in loading and another ¼ min. in dumping. One
man always walked along with each car, and another man helped pull the
wire rope back.

Including the cost of laying the track and installing the plant, the
cost of mixing and placing the 1,600 cu. yds. of concrete was only 55
cts. per cu. yd., in spite of the high wages paid. However, the men were
working for a contractor under a very good superintendent.

Summing up the cost of the concrete in the arches of this bridge, we
have:

                                       Per cu. yd.
1.35 bbl. cement at $3                    $4.05
1 cu. yd. gravel at $1                     1.00
66 lbs. of steel in place at 2.2 cts.      1.45
Centers in place (lumber used once)        1.12
Labor, mix and place concrete              0.55
                                          -----
Total                                     $8.17

The cost of the nails, wire, excavation and plant rental is not
available, but could not be sufficient to add more than 10 cts. per cu.
yd. under the conditions that existed in this case.

~CONCRETE RIBBED ARCH BRIDGE AT GRAND RAPIDS, MICH.~--The bridge consisted
of seven parabolic arch ribs of 75 ft. clear span and 14 ft. rise. The
five ribs under the 21-ft roadway were each 24 ins. thick, 50 ins. deep
at skewbacks and 25 ins. deep at crown; the two ribs under the sidewalks
were 12 ins. thick and of the same depth as the main ribs. Each rib
carried columns which supported the deck slab. Columns and ribs were
braced together across-bridge by struts and webs. All structural parts
of the bridge were of concrete reinforced by corrugated bars. The
abutments were hollow boxes with reinforced concrete shells tied in by
buttresses and filled with earth. There were in the bridge including
abutments 884 cu. yds. of concrete and 62,000 lbs. of reinforcing metal,
or about 70 lbs. of reinforcing metal per cu. yd. of concrete. Of the
884 cu. yds. of concrete 594 cu. yds. were contained in the abutments
and wing walls and 290 cu. yds. in the remainder of the structure. (Fig.
168.)

[Illustration: Fig. 168.--Details of Ribbed Arch Bridge.]

_Centers._--The center for the arch consisted of 4-pile bents spaced
about 12 ft. apart in the line of the bridge. The piles were 12×12
in.×24 ft. yellow pine and they were braced together in both directions
by 2×10-in. planks. Each bent carried a 3×12-in. plank cap. Maple
folding wedges were set in these caps over each pile and on them rested
12×12-in. transverse timbers, one directly over each bent. These
12×12-in. transverse timbers carried the back pieces cut to the curve of
the arch. The back pieces were 2×12-in. plank, two under each sidewalk
rib and four under each main rib of the arch. The back pieces under each
rib were X-braced together. The lagging was made continuous under the
ribs but only occasional strips were carried across the spaces between
ribs. This reduced the amount of lagging required but made working on
the centers more difficult and resulted in loss of tools from dropping
through the openings. Work on the centers and forms was tiresome owing
both to the difficulty of moving around on the lagging and to the
cramped positions in which the men labored. Carpenters were hard to keep
for these reasons.

_Concrete._--A 1-7 bank gravel concrete was used for the abutments and a
1-5 bank gravel concrete for the other parts of the bridge. The concrete
was mixed in a cubical mixer operated by electric motor and located at
one end of the bridge. The mixed concrete was taken to the forms in
wheelbarrows. The mixture was of mushy consistency. No mortar facing was
used, but the exposed surfaces were given a grout wash. In freezing
weather the gravel and water were heated to a temperature of about 100°
F.; when work was stopped at night it was covered with tarred felt, and
was usually found steaming the next morning.

_Cost of Work._--The cost data given here are based on figures furnished
to us by Geo. J. Davis, Jr., who designed the bridge and kept the cost
records. Mr. Davis states that the unit costs are high, because of the
adverse conditions under which the work was performed. The work was done
by day labor by the city, the men were all new to this class of work,
the weather was cold and there was high water to interfere, and work was
begun before plans for the bridge had been completed, so that the
superintendent could not intelligently plan the work ahead. Cost keeping
was begun only after the work was well under way. Many of the items of
cost are incomplete in detail.

The following were the wages paid and the prices of the materials used:

Materials and Supplies:
No. 1 hemlock matched per M. ft.                                  $20
No. 1 hemlock plank per M. ft.                                     17
No. 2 Norway pine flooring per M. ft.                              19
No. 2 yellow pine flooring per M. ft.                              20
12×12-in.×16-ft. yellow pine per M. ft.                            29
12×12-in.×24-ft. yellow pine, piling per M. ft.                    27
Maple wedges per pair                                     50 cts.
½-in. corrugated bars per lb.                              2.615 cts.
¾-in. corrugated bars per lb.                              2.515 cts.
7/8-in. corrugated bars per lb.                            2.515 cts.
Coal per ton                                                       $4
Electric power per kilowatt                                    6 cts.
Medusa cement per bbl.                                          $1.75
Aetna cement per bbl.                                            1.05
Bank gravel per cu. yd.                                          0.85
Sand per cu. yd.                                                 0.66
Carpenters per day                                         $3 to 3.50
Common labor per day                                             1.75

The summarized cost of the whole work, with such detailed costs as the
figures given permit of computation, was as follows:

General Service:                              Total.      Per cu. yd.
Engineering                                     $451           $0.512
Miscellaneous                                     75            0.084

Pumping:                                            Total 110 days.
Coal at $4 per ton                                        $210
Machinery, tools and cartage                               283
Labor                                                      497
                                                          ----
Total                                                     $990

This gives a cost of $9 per day for pumping.

Excavation:                                Total cost.   P. C. Total.
Timber cartage, etc.                             $ 375           17.6
Tools                                               69            3.3
Labor at $1.75                                   1,687           79.1
                                                ------          -----
Total                                           $2,131          100.0

Filling 5,711 cu. yds.:                           Total.  Per cu. yd.
Earth                                             $1,142        $0.20
Labor including riprapping                           396         0.07
                                                  ------        -----
Total                                             $1,538        $0.27

Removing Old Wing Walls:                          Total.
Labor and dynamite                                 $ 346
Tools and sharpening                                  64
                                                   -----
Total                                              $ 410

Hand Rail, 150 ft.:                             Total.   Per lin. ft.
Material                                         $ 278          $1.85
Labor                                               29           0.19
                                                 -----          -----
Total                                            $ 307          $2.04

Wood Block Pavement, 296 sq. yds.:               Total.   Per sq. yd.
Wood block, etc.                                  $ 695         $2.35
Labor                                                57          0.19
                                                  -----         -----
Total                                             $ 752         $2.54

Steel, 62,000 lbs.:                              Total.       Per lb.
Corrugated bars, freight, etc.                   $1,498     2.41 cts.
Plain steel, wire, etc.                              75     0.12 cts.
Blacksmithing, tools and placing                    438     0.71 cts.
                                                 ------     ----
Total                                            $2,011     3.24 cts.

                                                            Concrete.
Centering:                                       Total.   Per cu. yd.
Lumber and piles                                  $ 332         $1.14
Labor                                               272          0.95
                                                  -----         -----
Total                                             $ 604         $2.09

                                                 Total.   Per cu. yd.
Forms                                           $ 3,312        $ 3.75
Concrete                                          5,532          6.25
                                                -------        ------
Grand total                                     $18,113        $20.50

In more detail the cost of the various items of concrete work was as
follows for the whole structure, including abutments, wing walls and
arch containing 884 cu. yds.:

Form Construction:                               Total.   Per cu. yd.
Lumber and cartage                               $1,547         $1.75
Nails and bolts                                     129          0.15
Tools                                               110          0.12
Labor, erecting and removing                      1,526          1.72
                                                 ------         -----
Total                                            $3,312         $3.74

Concrete Construction.

Materials:
Aetna cement at $1.05                            $1,218         $1.37
Medusa cement at $1.75                              499          0.56
Sand at 66 cts. per cu. yd.                          37          0.04
Gravel at 85 cts. per cu. yd.                       915          1.04
                                                 ------         -----
Total materials                                  $2,669         $3.01

Mixing:
Machinery and supplies                            $ 549         $0.62
Power at 6 cts. per kw.                              52          0.06
Tools                                                22          0.02
Labor                                               737          0.83
                                                  -----         -----
Total mixing                                     $1,360         $1.53

Placing concrete                                  $ 609         $0.69
Tamping concrete                                  $ 481         $0.54

Heating Concrete:
Apparatus and cartage                             $  47         $0.05
Fuel                                                 96          0.11
Labor                                               270          0.31
                                                  -----         -----
Total heating                                     $ 413         $0.47
Grand total                                      $8,844         $9.98

Considering the abutment and wing wall work, comprising 594 cu. yds.,
separately, the cost was as follows:

  Forms:              Per cu. yd.
Materials                $1.20
Labor                     1.09
                          -----

    Total                $2.29
  Concrete:
Materials                $2.92
Labor                     2.38
                          -----

    Total                $5.30
Heating water and gravel $0.70
    Grand total          $8.29

Considering the arch span, comprising 290 cu. yds., separately, the cost
was as follows:

  Forms:             Per cu. yd.
Materials               $3.70
Labor                    3.03
                         -----

    Total               $6.73
  Concrete:
Materials               $3.22
Labor                    3.57

    Total               $6.79
      Grand total      $13.52




CHAPTER XVIII.

METHODS AND COST OF CULVERT CONSTRUCTION.


Culvert work is generally located on the line of a railway or a highway,
so that the facilities for getting plant and materials onto the work are
the best, and as culverts are in most cases through embankment, under
trestle or in trench below the ground level the advantage of gravity is
had in handling materials to mixer and to forms. Ordinarily individual
culverts are not long enough for any material economy to be obtained by
using sectional forms unless these forms are capable of being used on
other jobs which may occasionally be the case where standard culvert
sections have been adopted by a railway or by a state highway
commission. Various styles of sectional forms for curvelinear sections
are given in Chapter XXI, and centers suitable for large arch culverts
are discussed in Chapter XVII. Figure 169 shows an economic form for box
sections; it can be made in panels or with continuous lagging as the
prospects of reuse in other work may determine. For curvelinear sections
of small size some of the patented metal forms have been successfully
used.

~BOX CULVERT CONSTRUCTION, C., B. & Q. R. R.~--Mr. L. J. Hotchkiss gives
the following data. Box sections of the type shown by Fig. 169 are used
mostly; they range in size from single 4×4-ft. to double 20×20-ft. and
triple 16×20-ft. boxes. These boxes are more simple in design and
construction than arches, and for locations requiring piles they are
less expensive. The form work is plain and the space occupied is small
as compared with arches, so that excavation, sheeting and pumping are
less and the culvert can be put through an embankment or under a trestle
with less disturbance of the original structure. Finally, less expensive
foundations are required.

For small jobs where it does not pay to install a power mixer a hand
power mixer mounted on a frame carried by two large wheels has been
found at least as efficient as hand mixing; more convenient and easier
on the men. The machine is turned by a crank driving a sprocket chain;
it is charged at the stock piles and then hauled to the forms to be
discharged. Local conditions determine the capacity of power mixer to be
used. Difficulties in supplying material or in taking away the concrete
may readily reduce the output of a large machine to that of one much
smaller, and the small machine is cheaper in first cost and in
installation and operation. Where the yardage is sufficient to justify
the installation of equipment for handling the materials and output of a
large mixer it is found preferable to a small one, as the increase in
plant charges is not proportionately so great as the increase in the
amount of concrete handled. Again it may occur on a small job that the
concrete must be taken a long distance from the mixer, that a large
batch can be moved as quickly and as easily as a small one and the time
consumed in doing it is sufficient for the charging and turning of a
large mixer before the concrete car or bucket returns to it. Here a
large mixer, while it may stand idle part of the time, is still
economic.

[Illustration: Fig. 169.--Box Culvert and Form, C., B. & Q. R. R.]

The plant lay-outs vary with the local conditions, as the following will
show. In one case of a culvert located under a high, short trestle the
following arrangement of plant was employed: A platform located on each
side of the approach embankment about 8 ft. below the ties was built of
old bridge timbers. A track was laid on each platform and ran out over a
mixer located on the end slope of the embankment. Two mixers, one for
each platform, were used. From each mixer a track led out over the
culvert form and a track along the top of this form ran the full length
of the culvert. Gravel and sand were dumped from cars onto the side
platforms and thence shoveled into small bottom dump cars, which were
pushed out over the mixer and dumped directly into it. Cars on the short
tracks from mixers to culvert form took the mixed concrete and dumped it
into the distributing cars traveling along the form. The cars were all
hand pushed.

An entirely different lay-out was required in case of a long box culvert
located in a flat valley some 600 ft. from the track. A platform was
built at the foot of the embankment with its outer edge elevated high
enough to clear two tracks carrying 5 cu. yd. dump cars. The sand and
gravel was dumped from cars onto the side of the embankment, running
down onto the platform so that scraper teams moved it to holes in the
platform where it fell into the dump cars. These cars were hauled by
cable from the mixer engine and dumped at the foot of an inclined
platform leading to a hopper elevated sufficiently to let a 1½ cu. yd.
dump car pass under it. A team operating a drag scraper by cable moved
the material up the inclined platform into the hopper, whence it fell
directly into the car to which cement was added at the same time. The
charging car was then pulled by the mixer engine up another incline, at
the top of which it dumped into the mixer. The concrete car was hauled
up another incline to a track carried on the forms and reaching the full
length of the culvert work.

The placing of the reinforcement is given close supervision. When a wet
concrete is used it is found necessary to securely fasten the bars in
place to prevent them being swept out of place by the rush of the
concrete. A method of supporting the invert bars is shown by Fig. 169;
2×2-in. stakes are large enough and they need never be spaced closer
than 6 ft. The longitudinal bars are held on the stakes by wire nails
bent over and the transverse bars are wired to them at intersections by
stove pipe wire. The vertical wall bars are placed by thrusting the
ends into the soft footing concrete and nailing them to a horizontal
timber at the top; the horizontal wall bars are wired at intersections
to the verticals. In the roof slab the stakes are replaced by metal
chairs, or by small notched blocks of concrete.

The form construction is shown by Fig. 169. It is not generally made in
panels, since, as the work runs, the locations of boxes of the same size
are usually so far apart that transportation charges are greater than
the saving due to use a second time. No general rule is followed in
removing forms, but they can usually be taken down when the concrete is
a week old.

The boxes are built in sections separated by vertical joints, one
section being a day's work. The vertical joints are plain butt joints;
tongue and groove joints give trouble by the tenons cracking off in the
planes of the joints. A wet mixture is used and smooth faces obtained by
spading.

~ARCH CULVERT COSTS, N. C. & ST. L. RY.~--The cost of arch culvert
construction for the Nashville, Chattanooga & St. Louis Ry. is recorded
in a number of cases as follows:

~18-ft. Arch Culvert.~--Mr. H. M. Jones is authority for the following
data: An 18-ft. full-centered arch culvert was built by contract, near
Paris, Tenn. The culvert was built under a trestle 65 ft. high, before
filling in the trestle. The railway company built a pile foundation to
support a concrete foundation 2 ft. thick, and a concrete paving 20 ins.
thick. The contractors then built the culvert which has a barrel 140 ft.
long. No expansion joints were provided, which was a mistake for cracks
have developed about 50 ft. apart. The contractors were given a large
quantity of quarry spalls which they crushed in part by hand, much of it
being too large for the concrete. The stone was shipped in drop-bottom
cars and dumped into bins built on the ground under the trestle. The
sand was shipped in ordinary coal cars, and dumped or shoveled into
bins. The mixing boards were placed on the surface of the ground, and
wheelbarrow runways were built up as the work progressed. The cost of
the 1,900 cu. yds. of concrete in the culverts was as follows per cu.
yd.:

1.01 bbls. Portland cement                 $2.26
0.56 cu. yds. of sand, at 60 cts.            .32
Loading and breaking stone                   .25
Lumber, centers, cement house and hardware   .64
Hauling materials                            .04
Mixing and placing concrete                 1.17
Carpenter work                               .19
Foreman (100 days at $2.50)                  .13
Superintendent (100 days at $5.50)           .29
                                           ------
Total per cu. yd.                          $5.29

It will be seen that only 19 cu. yds. of concrete were placed per day
with a gang that appears to have numbered about 21 laborers, who were
negroes receiving about $1.10 per day. This was the first work of its
kind that the contractors had done. It will be noticed that the cost of
42 cts. per cu. yd. for superintendence and foremanship was
unnecessarily high.

~Six Arch Culverts 5 ft. to 16 ft. Span.~--All these arches were built
under existing trestles, and in all cases, except No. 2, bins were built
on the ground under the trestle and the materials were dumped from cars
into the bins, loaded and delivered from the bins in wheelbarrows to the
mixing boards, and from the mixing boards carried in wheelbarrows to
place. Negro laborers were used in all cases, except No. 5, and were
paid 90 cts. a day and their board, which cost an additional 20 cts.;
they worked under white foremen who received $2.50 to $3 a day and
board. In culvert No. 5, white laborers, at $1.25 without board, were
used. There were two carpenters at $2 a day and one foreman at $2.50 on
this gang, making the average wage $1.47 each for all engaged. The men
were all green hands, in consequence of which the labor on the forms in
particular was excessively high. The high rate of daily wages on
culverts Nos. 1 and 3 was due to the use of some carpenters along with
the laborers in mixing concrete. The high cost of mixing concrete on
culvert No. 2 was due to the rehandling of the materials which were not
dumped into bins but onto the concrete floor of the culvert and then
wheeled out and stacked to one side. The cost of excavating and
back-filling at the site of each culvert is not included in the table,
but it ranged from 70 cts. to $2 per cu. yd. of concrete.

Cost of Six Concrete Culverts on the N., C. & St. L. Ry. & St. L. Ry.

No. of culvert           1        2        3        4        5        6
Span of culvert        5 ft. 7.66 ft.   10 ft.   12 ft.   12 ft.   16 ft.
Cu. yds. of concrete.   210      199      354      292      406      986
Ratio of cement to
  stone                1:5.5    1:6.5    1:5.8    1:5.8    1:6.1    1:6.5
Increase of concrete
  over stone           16.0%     9.9%     6.3%    12.3%     8.3%     5.3%
Bbls. cement per cu.
  yd.                   1.02     0.90     1.06     1.01     1.00     1.09
Cu. yds. sand per cu.
  yd.                   0.43     0.49     0.44     0.46     0.46     0.47
Cu. yds. stone per
  cu. yd.               0.86     0.90     0.95     0.89     0.94     0.94
Total  days  labor
  (inc. foremen and
  supt.)                 702      607      784      726      768    1,994
Av. wages per day
  (inc. foremen and
  supt.)               $1.61    $1.33    $1.59    $1.19    $1.47    $1.46
Cost per cu. yd.--
  Cement                2.18     1.94     2.27     1.82     2.11     2.01
  Sand                  0.17     0.20     0.18     0.18     0.19     0.14
  Stone                 0.52     0.52     0.47     0.54     0.47     0.58
  Lumber                0.88     0.43     0.48     0.43     0.31     0.57
  Unload, materials     0.23     0.17     0.18     0.18     0.16
  Building forms        1.07     0.33     0.62     0.47     0.72     0.41
  Mixing & placing      1.59     1.74     1.69     1.35     1.23     1.26
                      ------   ------   ------   ------    -----    -----

Total per cu. yd.      $6.64    $5.33    $5.89    $4.97    $5.19    $4.97

~14-ft. 9-in. Arch Culvert.~--Mr. W. H. Whorley gives the following
methods and cost of constructing a 12-ft. full centered arch culvert 204
ft. long. The culvert was built in three sections, separated by vertical
transverse joints to provide for expansion; the end sections were each
61 ft. long and the center section was 70 ft. long. Fig. 170 is a
cross-section at the center; for the end sections the height is 14 ft. 9
ins., the crown thickness is 1 ft. 9 ins., and the side walls at their
bases are 5 ft. thick. The concrete was a 1-3-6 mixture, using slag
aggregate for part of the work and stone aggregate for a part. The
culvert was built underneath a trestle which was afterwards filled in.

_Mixing and Handling Concrete._--The height of the track above the
valley permitted the mixing plant to be so laid out that all material
was moved by gravity from the cars in which it was shipped until finally
placed in the culvert. Sand and aggregate were received in drop bottom
cars and were unloaded into bins in the trestle. These bins had hopper
bottoms with chutes leading to a wheeling platform, which was placed
between two trestle bents and extended over a mixer placed outside the
trestle. The cement house was erected alongside the trestle at the
wheeling platform level and a chute from an unloading platform at track
level to the opposite end of the house enabled the bags to be handled
directly from the car to the chute and thence run by gravity to the
cement house. Sand and aggregate were chuted from the bins into
wheelbarrows, wheeled about 23 ft., and dumped into a hopper over the
mixer. Water was pumped by a gasoline engine from a well just below the
trestle to a tank on the trestle, whence it was fed to the mixer by a
flexible connection, a valve so regulating the flow that the necessary
amount was delivered in the time required to mix a batch.

[Illustration: Fig. 170.--Section of Arch Culvert, N., C. & St. L. R.
R.]

The mixer was a No. 5 Chicago Improved Cube Mixer, operated by a
gasoline engine; a larger size would have been preferable since a batch
required only two-thirds of a bag of cement which had to be measured
which required the services of an additional man. The mixer was in
operation 194 hours and mixed 7,702 batches (1,217 cu. yds.), or a batch
every 87 seconds, or 6.3 cu. yds. per hour. During the last ten days it
mixed a batch every 78 seconds while running. The best short record made
was 291 batches in five hours, or one batch every 63 seconds, this being
at the rate of 58 batches equal to 9.2 cu. yds. of concrete in place per
hour, or nearly 1/6 cu. yd. per batch. It took about ½ minute to mix the
concrete and about the same length of time to charge and discharge the
mixer.

To convey the concrete from the mixer to the culvert walls a 1 cu. yd.
drop bottom car was used. This car ran on 30-in. gage tracks carried on
a trestle straddling the culvert walls and having its floor high enough
to clear the arch. A track ran lengthwise of the trestle over each
culvert wall, and a cross track intersecting both with turntables ran to
the mixer. Three men handled the car, a round trip to the extreme end of
the trestle being made in about 3 minutes. In the meantime the mixer was
discharging into a small hopper which unloaded into the car on its
return. One only of the three sections, of the culvert was built at a
time, both walls being brought up together. After a point had been
reached about 2 ft. above the springing on both walls, one track was
removed and the other was shifted to the center of the trestle.

_Forms._--There was used in the forms 15,000 ft. B. M. of 2-in. dressed
lagging for face work, 21,000 ft. B. M. rough lumber for back work, and
old car sills for studding. No charge was made for studding except the
cost of loading, the cost of the remaining lumber was $16 per M. for
dressed and $12.50 per M. for rough. A credit of one-third the cost was
allowed for the old material recovered. The total cost of the labor of
erecting the material in forms, bins and platforms was $666. The work
was done by a bridge crew of white men, the average rate of wages per
man, including the bridge foreman's time, being $2.20 per day. In
addition a mason at $3.50 per day and a carpenter at $2.25 per day
worked with the bridge crew in erecting forms.

_Cost._--The cost of the 1,217 cu. yds. of concrete in the culvert was
as follows:

Item.                                 Per cu. yd.
1.08 bbls. cement at $1.72                  $1.85
0.47 cu. yd. sand at 30 cts.                 0.14
0.25 cu. yd. broken stone at 51 cts.         0.13
0.8 cu. yd. slag at 26 cts.                  0.21
Lumber in forms, etc.                        0.30
Miscellaneous materials                      0.05
Labor, unloading materials                   0.11
Labor, mixing and placing concrete           0.42
Labor, building forms                        0.55
Labor, not classified                        0.18
Labor, excavating 40 cts. per cu. yd.        0.28
Labor, back filling and tearing down forms   0.10
                                             -----
  Total                                     $4.32

~CULVERTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION, WABASH RY.~--The following data relate to
culvert work carried out in constructing the Pittsburg extension of the
Wabash Ry. in 1903. All the work was done by contract.

_Plant I_: This plant was located on a hillside with the crushing bins
above the loading floor or platform which extended over the top of the
mixer, so that the crushed stone could be drawn directly from the chutes
of the bins and wheeled to the mixer. The sand was hauled up an incline
in one-horse carts and dumped on this floor, and was also wheeled in
barrows to the mixer. The proportions used were 4 bags of cement, 4
barrows of sand and stone dust and 7 barrows of crushed stone. A 7/8-cu.
yd. mixer was used and it averaged 40 cu. yds. per 10-hour day at the
following cost for labor:

Item.                                   Per day.  Per cu. yd.
1 foreman                                $ 3.00         $0.08
3 men charging with barrows                4.50          0.11
1 man attending engine and mixer           2.50          0.06
2 men loading concrete barrows             3.00          0.08
4 men wheeling concrete barrows (100 ft.)  6.00          0.15
4 men ramming concrete                     6.00          0.15
4 men wheeling and bedding rubble stones   6.00          0.15
                                         ------         -----
  Totals                                 $31.00         $0.78

Assuming 1/3 ton of coal per day at $3 per ton, we have 2 cts. more per
cubic yard for fuel.

_Plant II._--At this plant a Smith mixer was used with a loading floor 4
ft. above the ground, this low platform being made possible by having a
hole or sump in which the skip receiving the concrete was set. A derrick
handled the skips between the sump and the work. The batch was made up
of 2 bags of cement, 2 barrows of sand and 4 barrows of stone. The
output was 50 cu. yds. per day of 10 hours at the following cost:

Item.                                   Per day.  Per cu. yd.
1 man feeding mixer                       $1.50         $0.03
1 mixer runner                             2.50          0.05
1 derrick engineman                        2.50          0.05
2 tagmen swinging and dumping              3.00          0.06
6 men wheeling materials                   9.00          0.18
2 men tamping concrete                     3.00          0.06
1 foreman                                  3.00          0.06
                                         ------         -----
  Totals                                 $24.50         $0.49

The cost of fuel would add about 3 cts. per cubic yard to this amount.

~SMALL ARCH CULVERT COSTS, PENNSYLVANIA R. R.~--Mr. Alex. R. Holliday
gives the following figures of cost of small concrete culvert work
carried out under his direction. The culvert section used is shown in
Fig. 171. This section gives a slightly larger waterway than a 36-in.
cast iron pipe. Eight culverts, having an aggregate length of 306 ft.
were built, using a mixture of Portland cement and limestone and
screenings. Each culvert had a small spandrel wall at each end.

The work was done by a gang of six men, receiving the following wages:

Foreman, cents per hour    27.5
Assistant  "    "    "     17.5
Laborers   "    "    "     15.0
Teams      "    "    "     35.0

The materials were hauled about 1 mile from railway to site of work.
Cement, including freight and haulage, cost $1.97 per barrel. Limestone
and screenings cost 50 cts. per cu. yd. f. o. b. at quarry. No freight
charges are included in cost of any of the materials except cement. The
cost of the 306 ft. of culvert was as follows:

Item.                   Total.  Per lin. ft.  Per cu. yd.
Labor                  $443.14         $1.45        $3.35
Stone and screenings     78.50          0.25         0.60
Cement                  307.53          1.01         2.34
Forms                    12.00          0.04         0.09
                       -------         -----        -----

  Total                $841.17         $2.75        $6.38

[Illustration: Fig. 171.--Small Culverts, Pennsylvania R. R.]

~26-FT SPAN ARCH CULVERT.~--The culvert was 62 ft. long and 26-ft. span
and was built of 1-8 and 1-10 concrete mixed by hand. The wages paid
were: General foreman, 40 cts. per hour; foreman, 25 cts. per hour;
carpenters, 22½ to 25 cts. per hour, and laborers, 15 cts. per hour. The
cost of the concrete in place, exclusive of excavation but including
wing walls and parapet, was as follows:

                                    Per cu. yd.
0.96 bbl. cement, at $1.60              $1.535
1.03 tons coarse gravel, at $0.19        0.195
0.40 tons fine gravel, at $0.21          0.085
0.32 tons sand, at $0.36                 0.115
Tools, etc.                              0.078
Lumber for forms and centers             0.430
Carpenter work on forms (23 cts. hr.)    0.280
Carpenter work platforms and buildings   0.050
Preparing site and cleaning up           0.210
Changing trestle                         0.085
Handling materials                       0.037
Mixing and laying, av. 15½ cts. per hr.  1.440
                                        ------
  Total per cu. yd                      $4.540

There were 1,493 cu. yds. of concrete in the work. The excavation cost
$463 and the total cost was $7,243.

~COST OF RAILWAY CULVERT.~--The culvert was for a single track railway and
contained 113 cu. yds. of concrete and required 36 cu. yds. of
excavation. The figures are given by C. C. Williams as follows:

                 Cost of Material.

Kind and Amount of Material.    Unit Price.    Cost.
Stone, 113.2 tons                    $.70    $ 79.24
Sand, 46.8 yds.                       .55      25.74
Cement, 137 bbls.                     .85     116.45
                                             -------
  Total                                      $221.43

Lumber                                         52.50
Rail and bolts                                 36.60
                                             -------
  Total                                      $ 89.10

                        Excavation.

Labor, 189 hours at .15                      $ 28.35
Foreman, 60 hours at .30                       18.00
                                             -------
  Total                                      $ 46.35
                      Concrete.

Labor, 683 hours at .15                      $102.45
Foreman, 130 hours at .30                      39.00
                                             -------
  Total                                      $141.45

Forms.
Carpenters, 313 hours at .225                $ 70.42
Labor, 30 hours at .15                          4.50
                                             -------
  Total                                      $ 74.92

            Handling Materials.

Moving material, 245 hours at .15            $ 36.75
Unloading material, 95 hours at .15            14.25
Foreman, 20 hours at .30                        6.00
                                             -------
  Total                                      $ 57.00

   Superintendence and Office.

Superintendent, 6 hours at .50               $  3.00
Office                                         10.00
                                             -------
  Total                                      $ 13.00
                                             -------
  Grand total                                $643.25

           Proportional Costs.

                                            Per cent.
                                  Cost      of Total
                                Per Yard     Cost of
Item.                    Cost.  Concrete.   Concrete.
                                              ------
Concrete material        $221.43   $1.96        7.1
Laying concrete           141.45    1.25       23.6
Lumber                     52.50     .46       08.7
Rail and bolts             36.60     .32       06.1
Building forms             74.92     .67       13.3
Handling material          56.90     .50       09.0
Superintendent and office  13.00     .12       02.2
                                   -----      ------
  Total                            $5.28      100.00
Excavation                 46.35    1.28
                         -------
  Total                  $643.15

                  Contractor's Receipts.

113 yds. concrete at $5.95                  $672.35
36 yds. excavation at .30                     10.80
                                            -------
  Total                                     $683.15
  Total cost                                 643.15
                                            -------
Profit, 5.9% of contract price              $ 40.00

~12-FT. CULVERT, KALAMAZOO, MICH.~--A portion 1,080 ft. long of a new
channel built in 1902-3 for a small stream flowing through the city of
Kalamazoo, Mich., was constructed as an arch culvert of the form shown
by Fig. 172. The concrete section is reinforced on the lines indicated
by a double layer of woven steel wire fabric. The concrete was
approximately a 1 cement, 6 sand and gravel mixture.

[Illustration: Fig. 172.--Cross-Section of Culvert at Kalamazoo, Mich.]

The centers were built in sections 12½ ft. long of the form and
construction shown by Fig. 173, and a sufficient number was provided to
lay twelve sections of invert and six sections of arch. The arch centers
were arranged to be uncoupled at the crown; this with the hinges at the
quarter points permitted the two halves to be separated and each half to
be folded so that it could be carried from the rear of the work through
the forms still in place and erected again for new work. When in place
the center ribs rested on the side forms which set on the invert
concrete and are braced apart by the hinged cross-strut. This
cross-strut was the key that bound the whole structure together; the
method of removing this key is indicated by Fig. 174. From his
experience with these centers the engineer of the work, Mr. Geo. S.
Pierson, remarks:

"In work of this kind it is very important to have the centering
absolutely rigid so it will not spring when concrete is being tamped
against it and thus weaken the cohesion of the concrete. It is also
important to have the arrangement such that all the centering can be
removed without straining or jarring the fresh concrete. The centers
were generally removed in about three or four days after the concrete
arch was in place."

[Illustration: Fig. 173.--Center for Culvert at Kalamazoo, Mich.]

The invert concrete was brought to form by means of templates, Fig. 173,
and straight edges. The side forms were then placed and braced apart by
the struts and concreting continued to the skewback plane indicated in
Fig. 173. The arch form was then placed; it rested at the edges on the
side forms and was further supported by center posts bearing on boards
laid on the bottom of the invert. A template, Fig. 175, was used to get
the proper thickness and form of arch ring. Outside forms were used to
confine the concrete at the haunches but nearer the crown they were not
required.

[Illustration: Fig. 174.--Hinged Cross Strut for Center for Culvert at
Kalamazoo, Mich.]

Much of the work was done when the thermometer, during working hours,
ranged from 12° to 25° above zero. When the temperature was below
freezing, hot water was used in mixing the concrete and on a few of the
coldest days salt was dissolved in the water. In addition each section
of the work was covered with oiled canvas as soon as completed, and the
conduit was kept closed so far as was practicable to retain the heat.
Concreting was never stopped on account of cold weather.

[Illustration: Fig. 175.--Templet for Arch Ring for Culvert at
Kalamazoo, Mich.]

Account was kept of the cost of all work, and the figures obtained are
given in the following tables:

    Labor Force, Materials Used and Progress of Work.

Average progress per day in feet                         18.0
Greatest number of feet laid in one day                  28
Average number of laborers per day mixing and wheeling   10.04
Average number of laborers per day placing concrete       5
Average number of laborers per day setting up forms       4.57
Cubic yards of concrete mixed and wheeled per day per man 1.96
Cubic yards of concrete placed per day per man            3.54
Cubic yards of concrete per lin. ft.                      0.95
Barrels of cement per lin. ft.                            1.18
Barrels of cement per cu. yd.                             1.24
Proportion of cement to sand and gravel                    1-6

     Itemized Cost per Lineal Foot.

Sand and gravel                    $0.42
Cement                              2.44
Mixing and wheeling concrete        0.98
Labor placing concrete              0.47
Forms and templates                 0.30
Metal fabric                        0.39
Setting up forms                    0.43
Finishing                           0.09
Tools, general and superintendence  0.43
                                   -----
  Total per lineal foot            $5.95

The cost per cubic yard was thus $6.26. Wages were $1.75 per day.

~METHOD AND COST OF MOLDING CULVERT PIPE, CHICAGO & ILLINOIS WESTERN R.
R.~--During 1906, the Chicago & Illinois Western R. R., Mr. O. P.
Chamberlain, Chief Engineer, built a number of culverts of concrete pipe
with an interior diameter of 4 ft., and 6-in. shells. Fig. 176 shows the
forms in which the pipe was molded. Both forms are of ordinary wooden
tank construction. The inner form has one wedge-shaped loose stave which
is withdrawn after the concrete has set for about 20 hours, thus
collapsing the inner form and allowing it to be removed. The outer form
is built in two pieces with 2×5/8-in. semi-circular iron hoops on the
outside, the hoops having loops at the ends. The staves are fastened to
the hoops by wood screws 1¾ ins. long driven from the outside of the
hoop. When the two sides of the outer form are in position, the loops on
one side come into position just above the loops on the other side, and
four ¾-in. steel pins are inserted in the loops to hold the two sides
together while the form is being filled with concrete and while the
concrete is setting. After the inner form has been removed, the two pins
in the same vertical line are removed and the form opened horizontally
on the hinges formed by the loops and pins on the opposite side. The
inner and outer forms are then ready to be set up for building another
pipe.

[Illustration: Fig. 176.--Form for Molding Culvert Pipe.]

The concrete used in manufacturing these pipes was composed of American
Portland cement, limestone screenings and crushed limestone that has
passed through a ¾-in. diameter screen after everything that would pass
through a ½-in. diameter screen had been removed. The concrete was mixed
in the proportions of one part cement to three and one-half parts each
of screenings and crushed stone. All work except the building of the
forms was performed by common laborers. In his experimental work Mr.
Chamberlain used two laborers, one of whom set the forms, and filled
them and the other of whom mixed the concrete. The pipes were left in
the forms till the morning of the day after molding. The two laborers
removed the forms filled the day before, the first thing in the morning,
and proceeded to refill them. The average time the concrete was allowed
to set before the forms were removed was 16 hours. Mr. Chamberlain
believes that with three men and six forms the whole six forms could be
removed and refilled daily. Based on the use of only two forms with two
laborers removing and refilling them each day, and on the assumption
that a single set of forms costing $40 can be used only 50 times before
being replaced, Mr. Chamberlain estimates the cost of molding 4-ft.
pipes as follows:

2 per cent, of $40 for forms                  $0.80
1.1 cu. yds. stone and screenings at $1.85     2.04
0.8 bbls. cement at $2.10                      1.68
10 hours' labor at 28 cts.                     2.80
                                              -----
  Total per pipe                              $7.32

This gives a cost of $1.83 per lineal foot of pipe or practically $7 per
cu. yd. of concrete. The pipe actually molded cost $2.50 per lin ft., or
$9.62 per cu. yd. of concrete, owing to the small scale on which the
work was carried on--the laborers were not kept steadily at work.

The pipes were built under a derrick and loaded by means of the derrick
upon flat cars for transportation. At the culvert site they were
unloaded and put in by an ordinary section gang with no appliances other
than skids to remove the pipes from the cars. As each four-foot section
of this pipe weighs about two tons, it was not deemed expedient to build
sections of a greater length than 4 ft., to be unloaded and placed by
hand. On a trunk line, however, where a derrick car is available for
unloading and placing the pipes, there is no reason why they should not
be built in 6 or 8-ft. sections.




CHAPTER XIX.

METHODS AND COST OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BUILDING CONSTRUCTION.


If we set aside concrete block construction, virtually all concrete used
in building construction is reinforced; plain monolithic or mass
concrete now, as in the past, is one of the secondary building
materials. It is reinforced concrete building construction that is
discussed in this chapter. In no class of concrete work is the
contractor's responsibility for the successful outcome of the work
greater than in reinforced concrete building construction. No degree of
excellence in design can make up for incompetent, careless or dishonest
work in construction. This is true not merely in the general way that it
is true of all engineering construction--it is true in a special way
peculiar to the material. Except for the reinforcing steel, the
contractor for concrete building work has no guarantee of the quality of
any element of his work except his own faithful care in performing every
task that combines to produce that element. The quality of his concrete
depends upon the care with which he has chosen his cement, sand and
stone, and on the perfection with which he has incorporated them into a
homogeneous mixture. The quality of his beam or column, then, depends
upon the care with which the concrete is placed in position with the
reinforcement and with which the supporting forms are maintained until
the member is amply strong to do without support. There is no certainty
of any detail except the certainty that is had by performing every part
of the work as experience has taught that it should be performed if
perfect results are to be attained. We have dwelt thus emphatically on
the responsibility in concrete building work of the contractor for the
reason that in the past it has been upon the contractor that the burden
of failure has been generally shifted.

The construction work of buildings is divided into (1) construction,
erection and removal of forms; (2) fabrication and placing of
reinforcement; (3) mixing, transporting and placing concrete.


CONSTRUCTION, ERECTION AND REMOVAL OF FORMS.

The stereotyped text-book statement that forms must be true to
dimensions and shape and rigid enough in construction to maintain this
condition under all loads that they have to sustain mentions only one of
the factors that the constructing engineer or the contractor has to keep
in mind in designing such forms. His design must be made true and rigid
at the least possible cost for first construction of lumber and
carpenter work; it must be made with the plan in mind of using either
the same forms as a whole or the same form material several times in one
structure; it must be made with a view to convenience in taking down,
carrying and re-erecting the forms the second or third time; and it must
be made with the object in sight of securing the greatest salvage value
either in forms fit for use again or in form lumber that can be sold or
worked up for other purposes.

The general conditions governing the computation and design of economic
form work are discussed in Chapter IX.

~COLUMN FORMS.~--Concrete columns are usually square or rectangular in
section, with, commonly, chamfered or beveled corners. The popularity of
these sections is due very largely to the simplicity of the forms
required. When hooped reinforcement is used, the column section is
always circular or polygonal. Hollow sections, T-section and channel
sections are rarely employed and then only for wall columns.

Column forms should be made in units which can readily be assembled,
taken apart and re-assembled. The number, arrangement and size of the
units are determined by the shape and size of the column and the means
adopted for handling the forms. For square or rectangular columns there
will be usually four units of lagging, one for each side, plus the
number of clamps or yokes used to bind the sides together. Yokes or
clamps will seldom be spaced over 3 ft. apart unless very heavy lagging
is used; 2 ft. spacing for yokes is common. For circular columns two
units of lagging are necessary and this is the number commonly used; the
yokes or hoops are spaced about as for rectangular columns. Metal forms
can be used to good advantage for cylindrical columns. Forms for
polygonal columns are difficult to construct in convenient units. Forms
built complete a full story high and concreted from the top are
essential where wet and sloppy concretes are used. In Europe, where
comparatively dry concretes are employed and where the reinforcement is
commonly placed a piece at a time as concreting progresses, three sides
of a rectangular form are erected full height and the fourth side is
built up as the concrete and metal are placed. This construction is now
less common, even abroad, than it was, since wetter mixtures are coming
to be approved by European engineers to a greater extent now than
formerly. It is a time consuming method and with wet mixtures it has
nothing to recommend it. For lagging 1¼ and 2-in. plank are commonly
used; with yokes spaced 2 ft. apart the lighter plank is amply strong
and reduces the weight of the units to be handled as well as the amount
of form lumber required.

[Illustration: Fig. 177.--Form for Rectangular Column for Factory
Building, Cincinnati, O.]

Column forms should always be constructed with an opening at the bottom
by means of which the reinforcement can be adjusted and sawdust,
shavings and other material cleaned out.

~Rectangular Columns.~--The form shown in section by Fig. 177 was used in
constructing a factory building at Cincinnati, O. Two 2×4-in. studs at
each corner carry the horizontal side lagging boards and are clamped
together by yokes composed of four hardwood corner saddles connected
around the form by a hooked rod with center turnbuckle on each side. No
nails are used in assemblying the parts; the same studding and yokes
serve for several sizes of column, the lagging alone being changed. The
lumber required for studding is 5½ ft. B. M. per foot of column length.
The lumber required for lagging, using 1 in. boards, would be 2-2/3 ft.
B. M. for a 12-in. column, and 2/3 ft. B. M. would be added for every
2-in. increase in size of the column. About 3½ ft. B. M. is required for
each set of four corner saddles. With the studs rabbeted at the mill,
the carpenter work is reduced to the simple task of sawing the boards
and struts to length. The form is taken down by simply unscrewing the
turnbuckles; it can be erected by common labor in charge of one
carpenter to attend to the plumbing and truing-up. The form can be used
over and over and for columns of different sizes without change except
in the length of the lagging boards.

The form shown by Fig. 178 was used in constructing a nine-story
warehouse at St. Paul, Minn.; it is a design which has become almost
standard with a number of large building contractors. In this
construction lagging boards the full length of the column are used and
are held without nails by yokes. The yokes consist of two heads of wood
held together by threaded rods with nuts; between the rods and the
lagging are struts or blocks serving both as spacers and to hold the
lagging to plane and surface. The yoke proper is adjustable to the
extent of the threaded portions of the tie rods. It is to be noticed
that the lagging boards are not connected by battens or cleats,
therefore, two or three widths of stock serve for all ordinary changes
in size of columns and carpenter work is limited to sawing them to
length. Furthermore as the boards are full column length, their salvage
value when removed from the forms is high. Common laborers under a
carpenter foreman can assemble and erect the form. For a 12-in. column
and using 3×4-in. yokes spaced 2 ft. apart and 1¼-in. lagging, this form
requires about 12 ft. B. M. of lumber per foot length of column. The
column form shown by Fig. 226 for the six-story building described in a
succeeding section differs from the one described only in the details
of the yoke construction. In place of the struts between the wooden
heads of the yoke a cleat is nailed across the projecting ends which has
to be pried loose every time the yoke is removed and nailed into place
again every time the yoke is put onto another form; these repeated
nailings soon destroy the yoke heads. This form as constructed requires
about 8¾ ft. B. M. of lumber per foot length of 12-in. column, which is
3¼ ft. B. M. less than is required for the form shown by Fig. 177. The
saving comes entirely in the yoke construction.

[Illustration: Fig. 178--Form for Rectangular Column for Warehouse at
St. Paul, Minn.]

The form shown by Fig. 238 is of the same general type as are the two
just described, the chief difference in detail being in the yoke
construction and in the forming of the lagging boards into a panel or
unit for each side by means of battens. This panel construction makes a
lagging unit which is more convenient to handle, but less convenient to
adapt to changes in size of column. The salvage value of the lumber is
also reduced by the nailing. Assuming 1¼-in. lagging and a yoke spacing
of 2 ft., to permit direct comparison, this form requires 10½ ft. B. M.
of lumber per foot length of 12-in. column as compared with 12 ft. B. M.
for the form shown by Fig. 177 and 8¾ ft B. M. for the form shown by
Fig. 178. As actually constructed with 2-in. lagging the form shown by
Fig. 238 requires about 14 ft. B. M. of lumber per foot length of 12-in.
column.

The French constructor, Hennebique, uses the column form construction
shown by Fig. 179. Three sides of the forms are built full length of
vertical plank and the fourth is built up of horizontal lagging nailed
on a board at a time as concreting progresses. In place of rectangular
yokes, steel clamps of special form are used to hold the lagging in
place. To tear down this form requires drawing the nails in the
horizontal lagging and the knocking loose of the clamps. The vertical
lagging is of necessity connected by battens into panels to make it
possible to hold it in place by the form of clamp used. Assuming 2-in.
vertical lagging with 7/8×3-in. battens every 3 ft., and 7/8-in.
horizontal lagging this form requires about 12 ft. B. M. of lumber for
every foot length of 12-in. column. This form seems to offer no
particular merits to American eyes: there is practically no saving in
lumber over forms with rectangular yokes and the clamp shown, while
adjustable, is not nearly so rigid and secure a bond for the lagging as
is a good yoke.

[Illustration: Fig. 179.--Form Used by Mr. Hennebique for Rectangular
Columns.]

[Illustration: Fig. 180.--Form for Rectangular Column for a Factory
Building, New York City.]

The form shown by Fig. 180 is an extreme example of nailed construction
throughout, no yokes or clamps being used. It was used in constructing a
factory building in New York City. Horizontal lagging nailed to
vertical studs was used for all four sides; three sides were built up
full height and the fourth side was placed a board at a time as
concreting progressed. This form required 7-1/3 ft. B. M. of lumber per
foot length of 12-in. column, which is probably about as low in lumber
as column form construction can be got. The labor of tearing down and
re-erecting the form would be high as also would the waste of lumber.
Nailed forms of this type are rarely used.

[Illustration: Fig. 181.--Form for T-Section Wall Column.]

[Illustration: Fig. 182.--Form for Corner Wall Column.]

The form shown by Fig. 181 was used for molding T-section wall columns
for a power station. It is noteworthy for its section; because of the
provision for molding grooves in the two sides to which the curtain
walls join, and because of the manner in which three of the eight sides
were built up as the concreting progressed. The sides a b c, d e and
f g h were erected in full column units and the sides c d, e f and
h a were erected in sections 2 ft. high as concreting progressed. The
yokes were spaced 2 ft. apart. Using 1¼-in. stuff for yokes and lagging
this form as built required about 16 ft. B. M. per foot length of
column. Except for the beveling of the mold for the curtain wall
recesses, the framing is all plain saw and hammer work.

[Illustration: Fig. 183.--Core Form for Hollow Column.]

A corner wall column form is shown by Fig. 182 and as this was an
example of hollow column work the section of the concrete within the
form is shown. Forms of this shape and of T-section are properly classed
as special form work so that the examples given here are helpful merely
as indicating general methods that may be followed. This particular form
required 15¾ ft-B. M. of 7/8-in. lagging per foot of column length, and,
neglecting the special top frame, about 16 ft. B. M. of "staging" per
foot to support the lagging. The core forms for molding the hollow
spaces in the columns of this particular building are shown in Fig. 183.
The cross pieces or keys carried on the 5/8-in. bolts as pivots are
revolved a quarter turn to slip clear of the slots and permit the sides
to close together and free the core for withdrawal. In many cases the
contractor will find it preferable to use thin sheet metal core molds or
light wooden cores and leave them in place. In one case known to the
authors where hollow wall columns were used as hot air ducts for a
heating system the duct was laid up of one row of bricks, encircled by
the column form and the annular space concreted around the brick duct as
a core. The rare use of irregular columns makes form and core
construction for them a special problem requiring special detailed
estimates in each case. The channel section wall column form shown by
Fig. 230 is a case in point; here the form became practically a portable
mold for duplicating columns as many times as was desired.

[Illustration: Fig. 184.--Form for Large Rectangular Columns.]

As an example of form work for very large columns or pillars that shown
by Fig. 184 is particularly good; it was used for constructing eight
3-ft. square pillars for a water tank tower. The lagging consists of
four panels made by nailing horizontal boards to vertical studs. The
panels are clamped together by rectangular yokes spaced 3 ft. apart.
There are nearly 27½ ft. B. M. of lumber per foot length of 3-ft. column
in this form.

[Illustration: Fig. 185.--Adjustable Form for Rectangular Columns.]

The form shown by Fig. 185 was used by Mr. R. W. Maxton in constructing
a large factory building at St. Louis, Mo., and is notable for the means
adopted for centering the forms and for reducing their lateral
dimensions to fit them for molding the decreasingly smaller columns of
the upper floors. To center the forms the short angles A A are molded
into the concrete so as to project slightly above the tops of the floor
slab. Also the pieces of wood C are molded into the floor slab. The
form is set over the angles and lined up truly by nailing the blocks B
to the blocks C. It will be noticed also that the column mold bears
only at the four corners the lagging being cut away somewhat on each
side so as to afford an opening for cleaning. The lagging for the sides
of the column mold is battened together to form four units or panels
which are held together by iron clamps of the form shown. Lag screws
are used everywhere in place of nails. The notable feature, however, is
the piecing out of the lagging panels with 1-in. strips, one or more of
which can be ripped off on each side to reduce the size of the forms as
the columns grow smaller toward the top of the building.

~Polygonal Columns.~--Forms for polygonal columns require more lumber and
more carpenter work and are less susceptible of ready arrangement into
units than forms for rectangular columns. There is no approach to a
uniform practice in their construction and the few forms shown here are
merely specific examples.

[Illustration: Fig. 186.--Form for Octagonal Column for a Factory
Building.]

The form shown by Fig. 186 was used for interior columns of octagonal
section with hooped reinforcement for a factory building. This form for
a 12-ft. octagonal column 24 ins. across between sides requires
approximately 325 ft. B. M. of lumber. The form shown by Fig. 187 was
used by the same engineer in another building; it is, as will be noted,
in four units coming apart in joints at diagonally opposite corners.
This form for an octagonal column 18 in. across between sides required
about 13 ft. B. M. of lumber per foot of column length, with yokes
spaced 3½ ft. apart.

The form shown by Fig. 188 was used in a large warehouse at Chicago,
Ill. It will be noted from the dotted lines that one yoke clamps the
sides a a, the next the sides b b and so on. This does away with
triangular blocking to hold the corner boards that is used in the form
shown by Fig. 187. Six pairs of yokes were used for each column so that
the yoke spacing was about 2 ft. With 2×6-in. yokes and 1½-in lagging a
form for a column 18 ins. between sides would require some 17 ft. B. M.
per foot of column length.

[Illustration: Fig. 187.--Form for Octagonal Column for Factory
Building.]

[Illustration: Fig. 188.--Form for Octagonal Column for a Warehouse,
Chicago, Ill.]

~Circular Columns.~--Circular columns have been most frequently molded in
steel forms, and these are by all odds the best for general work. Made
in two parts of sheet steel and in sections that are set end to end one
on another a form is obtained which is easy to erect, remove and
transport. Wood forms for circular columns are rather clumsy affairs and
are expensive to construct. Such a form, Fig. 190, is described in the
succeeding section; another is shown by Fig. 189. This form was used
successfully for filling and encasing steel columns for a fireproof
building in Chicago, Ill., and is a favorite circular form construction
in Europe. It is apparent that the hooping needs to be very heavy and
that the form is one that will be hard to handle and rather expensive to
make.

In several instances, where hooped reinforcement has been used, the
hooping has been wrapped with, or made of, expanded metal or other
mesh-+work, and the concrete deposited inside the cylinder thus formed,
without other form work. A six-story factory building in Brooklyn, N.
Y., was built with circular interior columns from 28 ins. to 12 ins. in
diameter, reinforced by a cylinder of No. 10 3-in. mesh expanded metal,
stiffened lengthwise by four round rods 1 in. in diameter for larger
columns to ½ in. in diameter for smaller columns. This reinforcement was
set in place and wrapped with No. 24 ½-in. mesh metal lath, and the
cylinder was filled with concrete and plastered outside. A moderately
dry concrete is essential for such construction.

[Illustration: Fig. 189.--Form for Circular Column.]

The method of molding shells with the hooping embedded described for the
Bush terminal factory work in another section is another way of avoiding
form work of the usual type.

Light steel forms as well as the special construction noted must be
supplemented by staging to hold them in line and to carry the ends of
the girder forms that are ordinarily carried by the column forms. Four
uprights arranged around the column so as to come under the connecting
girders are commonly used; they are set close enough to the column to
hold the form plumb by means of blocks or wedges.

~Ornamental Columns.~--Forms for ornamental columns call for special
design and construction. For many purposes, such as porch and portico
work, the best plan is to mold the columns separately and erect them as
stone columns of like character are erected. Metal forms of various
patterns are made by firms manufacturing concrete block molds and can be
purchased from stock or made to order. Where the column is to be molded
in place form construction becomes a matter of pattern making, the
complexity and cost of which depends entirely upon the architectural
form and ornament to be reproduced. The molding of ornament and
architectural forms in concrete is discussed in Chapter XXIII, and the
two examples of ornamental column form work given here from recent work
indicate the task before the builder.

[Illustration: Fig. 190.--Form for Molding Fluted Cylindrical Column.]

The form shown by Fig. 190 was used for molding in place fluted columns
used in a court house constructed at Mineola, N. Y. The lagging in the
form of staves forms a 24-sided polygon and is held in position by hoops
and yokes. The molds for the flutes were formed by inserting screws from
the outside so as to penetrate the staves and molding half-round ribs of
plaster of Paris over them by means of the simple device shown. To
dismantle the form the screws were removed and the lagging taken down
leaving the plaster of Paris in place as a protection to the thin edges
until the final finishing of the building.

The methods illustrated by Fig. 191 were employed in molding columns in
place for a church at Oak Park, Ill. The bottom portions of these
columns were plain square sections molded in place in square molds. The
top portions were heavily paneled. The four corner segments were cast in
glue molds backed by wood with wires embedded as shown. After becoming
hard they were set on end on the plain column and tied and braced as
shown. The side openings were then closed by wooden forms and the
interior space was filled with concrete. The surface facing for these
columns was bird's-eye gravel and cement, with very little sand, mixed
very dry and placed and tamped with the coarse concrete backing.

[Illustration: Fig. 191.--Form for Ornamental Column for Church at Oak
Park, Ill.]

~SLAB AND GIRDER FORMS.~--Slab and girder construction for roofs and
floors is of three kinds: (1) Concrete slab and steel beam construction
in place; (2) concrete slab and girder construction in place (3)
separately molded slab and beam construction. The third method of
construction is distinct from the others in respect to form work as well
as other details and is considered separately in Chapter XX.

~Slab and I-Beam Floors.~--Centers for floor slabs between steel I-beams
are made by suspending joists from the beam flanges and covering them
with lagging. Frequently the joists and lagging are framed together into
panels of convenient size for carrying and erecting. The construction is
a simple one in either case where slabs without haunches or plain arches
form the filling between beams. Figure 192 shows an arch slab center;
plain hook bolts, with a nut on the lower end, passing through holes in
the joists are more commonly employed. For 1-in. lagging the joist
spacing is 2 ft., for 1½-in lagging, 4 ft., and for 2-in. lagging, 5 ft.

[Illustration: Fig. 192.--Form for Arch Slab Between I-Beams.]

[Illustration: Fig. 193.--Form for Flat Slab Floor Between I-Beams.]

A more complex centering is required where the slab has to be haunched
around the I-beams. The center shown by Fig. 193 was designed by Mr. W.
A. Etherton for the floor construction of the U. S. Postoffice Building
erected at Huntington, W. Va., in 1905. The center consists essentially
of the pieces A (2×4 ins. for spans not exceeding 6 ft.) and the
2×3-in. triggers B, which rest on the lower flanges of the floor beams
and thus support the forms. The trigger is secured at one end to the
piece A by a 1×3-in. cleat C and at the other end by 1×3-in. cleats
D on either side of A, which serve also as supports for the batter
boards E. The six-penny nail F is but partly driven and it is to be
drawn before removing the forms. When the supports of the beams are not
fireproofed the cleats D extend to the bottom of the trigger B, but
otherwise one cleat extends lower to secure the cross-strip G. To
remove the forms, draw the partly driven nail F; knock off the strip
G or loosen it enough to draw the nails in B>; pull the triggers on
one beam, and the forms will drop. If the soffit board H is used it is
necessary first to remove the strip G. For larger beams use the
spacing blocks H as shown; for smaller beams omit the trigger B and
extend A to rest on the flange of the beam, then to remove the form
A must be cut preferably near the beam.

No complete records of the cost of these forms were obtained, but the
following partial information is furnished by Mr. Etherton: Considering
a panel 6 ft. span by 19 ft. long on 15-in. I-beams, the lumber
consisting of 1-in. boards supported by 2×4-in. cross-pieces on 2×3-in.
triggers spread 3 ft. on centers, soffit of beams not fireproofed, it
required one carpenter five hours at 30 cts. per hour to complete the
panel. Figuring from this alone I should say that 10 cts. per sq. yd. is
a fair estimate for carpenter work. In working over the forms for
another floor the 1-in. boards require more time to handle and I should
say that the saving in cost of work over the first floor would be not
over 2 cts. per sq. yd. Two laborers moved their scaffolding and took
down the forms from three completed panels of 13 sq. yds. each in one
hour. Smaller panels require a longer time per yard. Counting for the
proper piling of lumber I should allow one hour for one man to take down
the forms for a 13-sq. yd. panel when conditions are the best. We
contracted with two laborers to remove the forms from the third floor
and roof and pile them in good shape on the ground just outside of the
building for an amount averaging about 4½ cts. per sq. yd., and the men
made but small wages on the contract. The lumber was used on three
floors and the roof, and the best of the 1-in. boards and all of the
2×4-in. and 2×3-in. stuff were used on a second job. For a safe estimate
based on the data secured I should figure the cost of labor and
materials for a three or four-story building about as follows:

                                       Per sq. yd.
Lumber at $20 per thousand              28 cts.
Carpenter work at 30 cts. per hour      10 cts.
Labor tearing down at 15 cts. per hour   4 cts.
                                        -------
Total per square yard                   42 cts.

Figure 194 shows an arrangement of centering between steel beams which
is novel in that it provides for molding a slab with girders. The form
was used in building the roof of a locomotive roundhouse. This
roundhouse was of the usual circular form and had a radial width of 80
ft. Each radial roof girder, which was an 18-in. I-beam was carried by
an outside wall pier and three I-beam columns encased in concrete. The
space between main roof girders was spanned by reinforced concrete
girders and roof slab. The center illustrated was employed for molding
the concrete girders and slab, and carries out the idea of making a
stiff and light center for considerable spans of slab without support by
staging. The truss construction of the frames supporting the girder box
will be noted.

[Illustration: Fig. 194.--Form for Slab and Girder Floor Between
I-Beams]

~Concrete Slab and Girder Floors.~--The construction of forms for this
type of floor should be such that the slab centers and the sides of the
girder molds can be removed without disturbing the bottoms of the girder
molds. This permits the beams to be supported as long as desirable and
at the same time releases the greater part of the form work for use
again. It is of advantage also to lay bare the concrete as soon as
possible to the hardening action of the free air. The slabs may be
similarly supported by uprights wedged up against plank caps; no very
great amount of lumber is required for this staging and it gives a
large assurance of safety. It is well also to give the girder molds a
camber or to crown them to allow for settling of the falsework.

The form shown by Fig. 195 was used in constructing girders from 14 to
23 ft. long in a factory building at Cincinnati, O. The sides are
separate from the bottom, being supported at the ends by cleats on the
column form and at intermediate points by struts under the yokes. The
floor lagging is carried by 2×4-in. stringers supported by the yokes.
Uprights set under the bottom plank keep the girder supported after the
sides and slab centers are removed. It will be noted that the form is
given a camber of 1-in. The structural details are evident from the
drawing. The form shows a method of molding a bracket for wind bracing;
a simple modification fits it for molding girders without brackets. A
rough computation gives 10 ft. B. M. of lumber per lineal foot of girder
form as shown.

[Illustration: Fig. 195.--Girder and Slab Form for Factory Building,
Cincinnati, O.]

[Illustration: Fig. 196.--Girder and Beam Forms for Factory Building,
Beverly, Mass.]

The form construction shown in Fig. 196 was employed in building the
slab and girder floors for the United Shoe Machinery Co.'s factory at
Beverly, Mass. In these buildings the main girders cross the building at
20-ft. intervals and midway between the main girders is a bridging beam
also reaching across the building. Floor beams span the 10-ft. spaces
between bridging beams and main girders at intervals of 3 and 4 ft.
Referring first to the main girder form, tall horses are set up at 3-ft.
intervals and connected by stringers laid on the caps. These stringers
carry a cross piece, with a cleat at each end, over each horse. The
bottom boards of the mold rest on these cross pieces and the side pieces
are set up between verticals wedged tight between the cleats. The beam
molds are a modification of the girder molds. The slab centers consist
of panels just large enough to span the openings between beams and
girders and composed of 1-in. boards fastened together by four 1×5-in.
cleats. Except in attaching the quarter round and triangular moldings
for fillets no nailing is necessary in erecting and taking down the
forms.

[Illustration: Fig. 197.--Girder and Slab Form for Concrete Building
Work.]

The form construction shown by Fig. 197 is one used by a large firm of
reinformed concrete builders. The slab centers can be struck and the
sides of the girder mold removed without disturbing the support for the
bottom of the beam. This form runs quite low in lumber, requiring for a
9×12-in. beam box including posts some 9 ft. B. M. per lineal foot of
box. The joists and lagging as shown require about 2 ft. B. M. per
square foot of floor slab. The practice is to give these girder boxes a
camber of ½-in. in 10 ft.

The construction shown by Fig. 198 is designed to provide adjustability,
to enable quick erection and removal and to do away with all nailing.
The construction is as follows: Wooden posts carry at their tops steel
T-beam cross-arms knee braced to the posts by steel straps. The
cross-arms carry the two jaws of a clamp, each consisting of a vertical
plate, and two diagonal braces, slotted so as to slide on the T-beam. A
cut nail or other piece of metal driven into the slots fastens the jaws
on the T-beam. The cross-arms carry the bottom boards of the girder
molds and the vertical plates of the jaws support the side pieces. A
blocking piece slipped between the braces carries the end of the joist
for the floor slab centers. This form is the invention of Mr. W. H.
Dillon and was used in constructing the nine-story, 260×150-ft.
wholesale hardware store Of Farwell, Osman & Kirk Co., St. Paul, Minn.

[Illustration: Fig. 198.--Girder and Slab Form for Warehouse at St.
Paul, Minn.]

[Illustration: Fig. 199.--Girder and Slab Form for Factory Building, New
York, N. Y.]

The form shown by Fig. 199 was used in constructing a factory building
in Long Island City, N. Y., and it is given here chiefly for the purpose
of exhibiting the unnecessary complexity of form work. Comparing this
form with that of nearly any of the preceding designs will bring out
the point. The design, however, was one of the earlier ones to recognize
the advantage of stripping the slab centers and the sides of the girder
boxes without disturbing the bottom plank of the boxes or the staging.
The drawing shows the independent support of the bottom board and side
pieces of the girder mold on the transverse caps of the staging posts.
These posts are 6×8 ins. in section and are spaced from 6 to 8 ft.
apart. Briefly described the bottom board is a single plank from 1 to 3
ins. thick, to which the side pieces are lag-screwed at the bottom. The
side pieces are panels composed of 4×7/8-in. vertical boards nailed to
top and bottom 2×4-in. horizontal timbers. A third horizontal timber
near the top serves as a seat for the ends of the joists carrying the
slab lagging and is braced from the bottom horizontal by vertical
stiffeners. The edge boards of the slab lagging are nailed to the top
edges of the side pieces of the girder mold and the tops of these side
pieces are connected across the trough by strips of board; all the slab
lagging boards except those at the edges of the girder molds are laid
loose. In the building referred to, after the floor concrete had set
about seven days the joists carrying the slab lagging were turned a
quarter over thus dropping the slab form about 2 ins. A few days later
the joists and lagging were taken down and the side pieces of the girder
mold were unscrewed and removed. The bottom board and staging posts were
left in position about three weeks longer and then dropped about 1 in.
by removing fillers from the staging post caps. In another week the
bottom boards and staging posts were taken down. This construction of
form and method of removing it permitted the concrete to be stripped so
that the air could get at it as fast as it was safe to take the support
from any part and at the same time kept the supports in such position
that they form a safety platform in case of collapse. A more important
advantage is that the form timber can be removed as fast as any part of
it is free and used again. Thus the lagging boards and joists and the
side pieces for the girder molds were free for use again about every two
weeks and yet the main supports of the girders were undisturbed until
they were fully a month old.

Other examples of girder and slab forms are shown in the succeeding
sections describing the construction of a six-story building and of a
garage constructed at Philadelphia, Pa.

[Illustration: Fig. 200.--Collapsible Core Forms for Girder and Slab
Floors.]

Another type of slab and girder form construction that deserves brief
mention because of its variation from usual practice and also because of
its extensive use by one prominent builder is shown by Fig. 200. Cores,
or inverted boxes, with four vertical sides and rounded corners, are set
side by side, with ends on stringers carried by the column forms, at
intervals wide enough to enable the beam to be molded between. A plank
resting on cleats on the sides of the cores forms the bottom of the beam
mold. The main girders are molded in similar spaces between the ends of
the cores in one panel and of those in the next panel. To permit the
core to be loosened readily it is hinged; when in place spacers inside
the core keep the sides from closing. These are knocked out, the core
sides close together and the core is removed for use in another place.
Cores similar to these were used in molding the ribbed floor for the
Bush terminal factory building described in a succeeding section. These
cores are capable of repeated use so that while they are somewhat
expensive to frame they give a very low cost of form work when the beam
and girder spacing is arranged largely in duplicate from floor to floor.
It will ordinarily be cheaper to have these cores made to pattern by
regular woodworking shops, and shipped to the building ready to erect.

~WALL FORMS.~--Wall work in modern commercial and manufacturing buildings,
when we come to eliminate windows and wall columns and girders, is
confined very largely to isolated curtain wall panels between windows
and framework. In such buildings, therefore, wall forms consist merely
of wooden panels, one for each face of the wall, constructed to fit the
spaces to be walled up. Where these spaces are duplicated from bay to
bay or story to story the same form panels will serve repeatedly. For
residences and other buildings having greater proportionate area of
blank wall the builder has a choice between continuous forms carried by
staging and movable panel forms.

[Illustration: Fig. 201.--Continuous Form for Wall Construction.]

For one and two-story buildings, with the usual variation in
architectural detail, panel work and window work, the continuous form
has many advantages, and the superior economy of movable panels in
retaining and other plain wall work is by no means always true here. One
good type of continuous wall form construction is shown by Fig. 201. The
gallows frames are spaced about 6 ft. apart along the wall and connected
by horizontal stringers nailed to the uprights or by diagonal bracing.
Each frame may be made up of 6×6-in. posts connected by 2×4-in.
cross-struts and diagonals with bolted connections so that the frame can
be taken down and put together easily and so that the bracing can be
removed as the wall is built upward. The other details of the form work
are shown by the drawing. This construction leaves a clear space for
placing the concrete and the cross pieces give support to runways; it
has been successfully used in a large amount of low building work.

[Illustration: Fig. 202.--Sectional Form for Wall Construction.]

Movable panel forms are of great variety in detail but are generally of
either one or the other types shown by Figs. 202 to 204.

The form shown by Fig. 202 was used in constructing a church at Oak
Park, Ill. For the back of the wall it consists of continuous lagging
held by 2×4 studs. For the face 1×6-in. lagging 12 ft. long was nailed
to 2×4-in. studs to form panels. It will be noted that the ends of the
studs are scarfed so as to interlock in succeeding panels. This
construction also shows a method of supporting the reinforcing bars
inside the form.

The form shown by Fig. 203 was used in constructing a large factory
building, and consisted of two side pieces or panels 3 ft. high and 16
ft. long, the distance between wall columns. For the first course these
were seated on the carefully leveled and rammed ground and securely
braced by inclined or horizontal struts inside and outside of the
building. After the concrete had set for three days the molds were
loosened and lifted until the lower edges were 2 ins. below the top of
the concrete and there they were held by horizontal bolts through their
lower edges and across the top of the concrete by ties nailed across
their tops every 3 ft. and by bracing to the falseworks supporting the
column and floor forms. The cross bolts passed through pasteboard
sleeves which were left permanently embedded in the wall. By starting
the molds level and finishing each course level with their tops no
difficulty was had in keeping the forms plumb and to level as they were
moved upward. This type of form has to be exteriorly braced to staging
or adjacent column forms, etc.

[Illustration: Fig. 203.--Sectional Form for Wall Construction.]

The type of movable panel form shown by Fig. 204 depends for all support
on the wall alone. The sketch shows the form filled ready to be shifted
upward; this operation consists in removing the bottom bolts and
loosening the top bolts enough to permit the studs to be slid upward the
full length of the slots. The lagging boards left free are then removed
and placed on top and the bolts are tightened, completing the form for
another section of wall.

[Illustration: Fig. 204.--Movable Panel Form for Wall Construction.]

[Illustration: Fig. 205.--Sullivan's Plank Holders for Wall Forms.]

A type of wall form construction intended to do away with studding and
bracing is illustrated by Figs. 205 and 206. In both cases metal plank
holders are used in place of studs, and practically the only difference
between the two is in the shape and material of the holders. The mode of
procedure is to work in horizontal courses one plank high around the
wall, removing the bottom plank and placing it on top as each new course
is begun after the first few courses have been laid. Using the
arrangement shown by Fig. 205 in constructing a building 100×54 ft. in
plan and 36 ft. high with 12-in. walls, a height of two 12×2-in planks
was all the form work that was ever necessary at any one time, so that
the amount of form lumber required for the building was 2,464 ft. B. M.
plus 205 ft. B. M. of 2×4-in. flooring strip, or altogether 2,669 ft. B.
M., or 0.24 ft. B. M. per square foot of exterior wall surface, or 6½
ft. B. M. per cubic yard of concrete. This same form lumber with 16
additional plank was then used to construct a building 100×100 ft.×16
ft. high, so that some 3,000 ft. of form lumber sufficed for 17,548 sq.
ft. (exterior surface) of wall or for 617 cu. yds. of concrete in 12-in.
wall, which gives 0.17 ft. B. M. per square foot or 4.8 ft. B. M. per
cubic yard of concrete.

[Illustration: Fig. 206.--Farrell's Plank Holders for Wall Forms.]

~ERECTING FORMS.~--The organization of the erecting gang will depend very
largely on the manner in which the forms have been constructed. If they
have been constructed in sections which go together with wedges and
clamps common laborers with a foreman carpenter in charge to direct and
to line and level the work will do the erecting, but if they have to be
largely built in place carpenters are necessary for all the work except
carrying and handing. There should be at least one foreman for every 15
to 20 men and a head foreman in charge of all form work. The mode of
procedure will differ for every job, but the following general
directions apply to all work in greater or less measure.

Clamps, bolts and wedges and not nails should be used wherever possible
in assembling parts of forms in erection; these devices are not only
quickly and easily applied in erection but they are just as quickly and
easily loosened in taking down forms and they can be loosened without
jarring the concrete member.

Lining girder forms and lining and plumbing column and wall forms is
high-class carpenter work and should be directed by competent
carpenters. A column or girder which is out of line or plumb not only
looks bad but may be required to be removed and corrected by the
engineer. The expense for one such correction will be many times that
which would have been involved by proper care in the first place.

Supports or staging for the forms should be used freely and well braced
in both directions. Uprights should be set on wedges and bear against a
cap piece and on a sill piece to distribute the load.

Erect, line and plumb the column forms first; then erect, line and level
the girder forms and set the girder staging, and finally erect and level
the slab centers and their supports.

Leave the foot of each column form open on one side at the bottom so
that the column reinforcement can be adjusted and connected up and so
that a clear view can be had through the form to detect any object that
may have fallen into the form and become wedged; this same opening makes
it possible to clean the form.

Give the forms a final inspection before concreting to check line and
level, to close open joints and to tighten up clamps and wedges. Finally
clean each form and wet it down thoroughly before placing the
concrete--do this just before placing the concrete.

~REMOVING FORMS.~--Good judgment and extreme care are essential in
removing centers. It goes without saying that forms should never be
removed until the concrete has set and hardened to such strength that it
will sustain its own dead weight and such live load as may come upon it
during construction. The determination of this condition is the matter
that calls for knowledge and judgment. Some cements set and harden more
rapidly than others, and concrete hardens more and more slowly as the
temperature falls. These and other circumstances must all be taken into
account in deciding upon the safe time for removal. Many large
contractors mold a cube of concrete for each day's work and leave it
standing on the finished floor exposed to the same conditions as the
concrete in the forms; examination of this sample block gives a line on
the condition of the concrete in the work and on the probable safety of
removing the forms at any time. In all cases it should be the
superintendent's duty to determine when to remove forms, and he should
satisfy himself by personal inspection that the concrete is in condition
to stand without support. It is also wise at least as a matter of
precaution for the contractor to secure the engineer's or the
architect's approval before removing any formwork.

Care in removing forms is essential for the reason that green concrete
is particularly susceptible to injury from shock or sudden strain. It is
well, therefore, to have a separate gang always doing the work. These
men will in a few days become trained under an experienced foreman so
that they will not only do the work with greater safety but also more
rapidly. This gang should, furthermore, be required to follow a regular
system in its work; a system which may not be departed from without
direct orders from the superintendent. An example of such a system is
outlined below.

The time of beginning this work of removal shall be given by the
superintendent. In warm, dry weather, with other conditions favorable,
removal may be begun after seven days. Then the following schedule may
be followed: At the end of seven days remove the sides of the column
forms. This gives an opportunity to determine the soundness of the
column casting and also serves the further desirable purpose of baring
the concrete to the curing and hardening action of the air. At the end
of 14 days loosen the wedges of the posts supporting the slab centers
and drop these centers a couple of inches: leave the centers in this
position for another day, meanwhile examining the tops of the slabs to
note their condition. Then remove the sides of the beam molds and the
slab centers, replacing the latter with temporary uprights supporting a
plank bearing against the underside of the slab. This precaution is
often neglected and with very little reason considering the importance
of the safeguard thus secured. Ordinarily the shores need not be left in
place more than a week, so that the amount of lumber thus tied up is
small. At the end of three weeks remove the uprights under the beam and
girder molds and strip the bottom plank. In this schedule it is assumed
that the floor is free from any great load and that no unusual loading
is put upon it; if a load of any consequence is to come on the floor the
shores and uprights should be left in place longer. No schedule of
removal can be blindly followed, and that given above is certain only
when the conditions are right and as stated.


FABRICATION AND PLACING OF REINFORCEMENT.

The amount of reinforcing steel used varies from 50 lbs. to 275 lbs. per
cu. yd. of concrete; the highest figure will be had only in very heavy
work and where very heavily reinforced raft foundations are employed,
and the lowest only in one-story buildings consisting of walls and roof.
A fair average is perhaps 150 lbs. per cu. yd. The cost of fabricating
and placing reinforcement will run from 1/3 ct. to 1½ cts. per pound,
but the last figure is exceedingly high; ¾ ct. per pound for fabricating
and placing is a reasonable labor charge.

Contractors frequently have their choice whether the steel shall be
fabricated into frames and placed as units or whether it shall be placed
in separate bars. For girders and columns the difference in cost of the
two methods is not so very great for steel in place when the fabrication
is done in the field. The unit frames cost considerably more than
separate bars to fabricate, but the cost of handling and placing them in
the forms is materially less; on an average the differences balance each
other. Where the frames are made up in regular mills unit frames
generally cost less to fabricate and place than do separate bars. The
use of unit frames in wall and floor slab reinforcement is generally
more expensive than the use of separate bars. The chief gain that comes
from the use of unit frames is the gain due to the certainty that the
reinforcing bars, stirrups, etc., are all there and are properly spaced
and placed.

~FABRICATION.~--Fabrication includes all the work necessary to prepare the
reinforcement ready to place in the forms. It amounts to very little
where separate bar types of reinforcement are used. Plain bending and
shearing operations comprise the whole task. Where the beam or column
reinforcement has to be made up into complete frames which can be
handled and placed as units this task is more complex and considerable
apparatus is essential to rapid and economical work. For this reason it
is wise usually to contract with some metal working shop to assemble and
connect up the various units and to furnish them ready for installation.
In many cases these unit frame types of reinforcement are patented and
the proprietors contract to fabricate and furnish them complete
according to the plans of the engineer or architect. Even where the
frame construction is not so controlled it will be economy generally to
have the fabrication done at regular shops where the necessary tools and
skilled workmen are had. In any case the bars should be ordered cut to
length at the mill so far as possible.

[Illustration: Fig. 207.--Rack for Storing Reinforcing Bars.]

Assuming the fabrication to be done in the field, the mode of procedure
will be as follows: Order the bars or rods to be shipped in bundles of
corresponding sizes and lengths of pieces with each bundle tagged with
its proper shop number or mark. The bundles should weigh about 200 lbs.;
this is a load easily handled by two men and so long as possible all
handling should be done in the original package, for when once broken it
is very hard to get men to carry a full load. As received, the bars of
each size and length should be stored by themselves. For ordinary bars
not having long prongs a rack of the general form shown by Fig. 207
serves the purpose excellently. When a great deal of metal must be kept
stored for some time it is wise to roof over the racks, not only to
protect the metal from rain and snow, but to enable the men to work dry
shod in stormy weather. Usually it will pay to have one man whose sole
duty it is to receive and check all metal and to attend to its
systematic arrangement on the racks; this same man will also direct the
removal of the metal to the shop where it is bent and otherwise worked
up, and can, if he is competent, earn his pay many times over in time
saved all along the line in handling and working up the reinforcement.
The authors have seen enough time wasted in hauling over and rehandling
metal in piles to get at what was wanted to pay for shed, racks and the
wages of a storekeeper several times during a moderate sized job. In
large work provide the storekeeper with a schedule showing the order in
which the metal is wanted for the work so that he can arrange it in that
order and can check up his receipts from the mills and report missing
items in time for the deficit to be made up before some part of the work
has to be stopped because of material missing. System in receiving and
storing the metal is absolutely essential to rapid and accurate work at
the bending and erecting tables.

The work done on the metal consists chiefly of bending. The metal can
usually be bent cold, but for sizes 1½-in. and upward some makes of bars
require heating; this can be done by laying the bars side by side on the
ground and arranging sticks and shavings on top of them in a strip 18
ins. to 2 ft. wide across the portion where the bend is to be. Only
moderate heating is usually required. Ordinary bending is a simple
process and can be done with very simple apparatus. Figures 208, 209 and
210 show frequently used devices, any of which can be made by an
ordinary carpenter. For heavy bars, 1½ and 2 ins., the device shown by
Fig. 210, with its heavy, swinging beam, is particularly efficient. An
example of more elaborate methods is had in the following description of
the processes employed in fabricating girder frames and hooped column
reinforcement for a large factory building. The building was 500×75 ft.,
with six stories and a basement, built for the Bush Terminal Co.,
Brooklyn, N. Y., in 1905. Three longitudinal rows of round columns and
two rows of rectangular wall columns carry heavy longitudinal girders
supporting floor slabs with corrugated undersides as shown by Fig. 211,
which also shows the floor slab reinforcement. About 12,000 cu. yds. of
concrete and 1,000 tons of reinforcing steel were required; hence 167
lbs. of steel were required for each cubic yard of concrete. The floors,
however, were designed to carry a load of 800 lbs. per sq. ft. The
particular feature of interest in this building was the fabrication of
all the column and girder reinforcement into unit frames and cylinders
in temporary workshops on the site.

[Illustration: Fig. 208.--Table for Bending Reinforcing Bars.]

[Illustration: Fig. 209.--Table for Bending Reinforcing Bars.]

[Illustration: Fig. 210.--Table for Bending Reinforcing Bars.]

[Illustration: Fig. 211.--Column and Floor Slab Construction for Factory
Building.]

The circular interior columns, varying from 30 ins. to 12 ins., in
diameter were molded in permanent shells of cinder concrete. The shells
were made in sections about 30 ins. long, with walls 1½ ins. thick,
which were set one on another with mortar joints to form the column
mold. In fabricating the shells the first step was to wind a helix of
steel wire on a collapsible mandrel about 4 ft. long; the mandrel was
set with the axis horizontal and was revolved by hand, the wire being
fed on also by hand and under a slight tension. After the wire helix was
completed it was wrapped with a sheet of expanded metal, the
longitudinal edges of which lapped a few inches and were tied by wire
ties. The expanded metal covering was also wire tied to the helix. Each
of these cylinders of expanded metal and wire was 30 ins. long and
formed the inner mold for making the shell. The outer mold consisted of
a sheet metal cylinder in two parts assembled and supported by wooden
yokes and framework. The two molds were assembled on a plank platform,
one inside the other, and about a common center. The annular space was
then filled with a 1-5 cinder concrete mixed moderately dry so that
while it would exude slightly through the expanded metal mesh it would
not waste to any extent. After from 18 to 24 hours the outer mold was
removed for reuse and the shell was left standing on the molding
platform until safe to handle. The larger shells, 30×30×1½ ins., weighed
about 150 lbs. each.

[Illustration: Fig. 212.--Device for Bending Reinforcing Rods.]

Some 2,000,000 lbs. of plain round steel rods from ¼ in. to 1½ ins. in
diameter were required for reinforcing the concrete. For the main
girders these rods were cut, bent and assembled into frames or trusses
which were placed as units. The main rods were ordered cut to length,
but the stirrup rods were ordered in lengths of 20 ft. and cut to
lengths as required. The rods were brought to the work in carload lots
and were stored according to lengths and sizes in racks under sheds.
Another shed was provided for the steelworkers, who cut and bent the
rods and assembled the girder frames ready for the workmen on the
building. There were about 50 different patterns of frames required.
They were made entirely by hand. For bending large size rods, heavy
compound levers were used; the lighter rods were bent by the device
shown in Fig. 212. The assembling of the trusses was accomplished as
shown by Fig. 213, using the steel framework of the erection shed as a
staging. Across the horizontals of the framework were placed two false
temporary top chord bars marked to the stirrup spacing of the truss
being assembled. On these bars, at the spaces marked, were suspended
stirrups with their lower ends hooked. The lower chord bars were then
suspended in the stirrup hooks and the whole assemblage of bars and
stirrups was then clamped rigid by the lever bars and intermediate
clamps. The loop ends of the stirrups were then bent by special wrenches
to the position shown at _2_, then closed by hammering to the position
shown at _3_, and finally they were wire tied. The process was a simple
one, and by adopting a regular routine the men became so expert that two
of them could complete many trusses in a working day. The contract price
for shaping the steel and assembling it into frames was 1 ct. per lb.;
the cost of the work to the contractor has been stated by Mr. E. P.
Goodrich, Engineer, Bush Terminal Co., to have been about ¾ ct. per lb.
The cost of placing the steel in the building was ¼ ct. per lb.

[Illustration: Fig. 213.--Sketches Showing Methods of Fabricating Girder
Reinforcing Frames.]

~PLACING.~--With unit frame reinforcement the number, size and location of
the bars have been made certain in the shops where the frames are
fabricated so that the erector has nothing to do but to line and level
up the frames in the forms, place such temporary braces as are needed to
hold them true, and make the end connections with abutting frames. Such
frames are usually provided with "chairs" to hold the bottom bars up
from the form so that little bracing or none is required. With separate
bar reinforcement the erector may either place the reinforcement
complete in the form by wire-tying the bars to each other, to temporary
braces or templates and to the forms, or he may insert the various
pieces of reinforcement in the concrete as the pouring advances,
depending on the surrounding concrete to retain them where inserted.
Generally a combination of both methods is employed.

The processes in detail of placing reinforcement are particularized in
several places in other sections; they will differ for nearly every job.
Here, therefore, general rules only will be given.

(1) See that the correct number and size of reinforcing bars, splices
and stirrups are used and that they are spaced and placed strictly
according to the working plans.

(2) Bars must be properly braced, supported and otherwise held in
position so that the pouring of the concrete will not displace them.

(3) Splices are the critical parts of column reinforcement. See that the
bars butt squarely at the ends and are held by pipe sleeves or wired
splice bars; see that the longitudinal rods are straight and vertical;
see that the horizontal ties or hooping are tight and accurately spaced.
When the reinforcement is built up inside the form one side is left open
for the work; ordinarily the column reinforcement will be fabricated
into unit frames, then an opening in the form at the bottom to permit
splicing will suffice.

(4) Take extreme care that beam and girder reinforcement is placed so
that the bottom bars lie well above the bottom board of the mold; use
metal or concrete block chairs for this purpose.

(5) See that the end connections and bearings of beam and girder frames
are connected up and have the bearings called for by the plans.

(6) See that line and level of all bars and of the reinforcement as a
whole are accurate; make particularly certain that expanded metal or
other mesh-work reinforcement lies smooth and straight.

(7) Give all reinforcement a final inspection just previous to pouring
the concrete; this is particularly essential where the reinforcement is
placed some time in advance of the concreting.


MIXING, TRANSPORTING AND PLACING CONCRETE.

A reinforced concrete building requires from 0.2 to 0.5 cu. yd. of
concrete per 100 ft. of cubical volume of the building, assuming walls,
floors and roof to be all of concrete. The amount of concrete to be
mixed, transported and placed is, therefore, large enough, even for a
building of moderate dimensions, to warrant close study of and careful
planning for this portion of the work. A few general principles can be
set down, but as a rule there is one best way for each building and that
way must be determined by individual conditions.

~MIXING.~--Concrete for building work has to be of superior quality so
that no chances may be taken either in the process of mixing or with the
type of mixer employed. Machine mixing and batch mixers should always be
employed. Machine mixing gives generally a more homogeneous and uniform
concrete than does hand mixing and is cheaper. Batch mixers are
generally superior and more reliable than continuous mixers where a
uniformly well mixed concrete is required. The capacity of the mixing
plant is determined by the amount of concrete to be placed and the time
available for placing it. Its division and arrangement is determined by
the area of the work and the type and arrangement of the plant for
transporting the materials and the mixed concrete. The following general
principles may be laid down: Make the most use possible of gravity; it
is frequently economy to carry all materials to the top of bins from
which point they can move by gravity down through the mixer to the hoist
buckets, and where natural elevations or basement floors below street
level permit gravity handling they should be taken advantage of. The
mixing should be done as near the place of concreting as practicable; in
building work this is the point on the ground which is directly under
the forms being filled. It is, of course, impracticable to secure so
direct a route as this from mixer to forms, but it can be more or less
closely approached; using two mixers, for example, one at the front and
one at the rear of a building cuts down the haul from hoist to forms
one-half. Other ways will suggest themselves upon a little thought. In
the matter of the mixing itself, it must never be forgotten that a batch
of concrete without cement which goes into a girder or column will
result in the failure of that member and possibly the failure of the
building. In massive concrete work a batch without cement will not
endanger the stability of the structure, but in column and floor work in
buildings it is certain disaster. Formanship at the mixer is, therefore,
highly important and a cement man who realizes the responsibility of his
task is equally important.

~TRANSPORTING.~--Transporting the mixed concrete is divided into three
operations--delivering concrete from mixer to hoist, hoisting, and
delivering hoisted concrete to the forms. The delivery from mixer to
hoist may be by direct discharge into hoist bucket, by carts or
wheelbarrows, or by cars carrying concrete or concrete buckets. Hoisting
may be done by platform hoists or elevators, by bucket hoists, or by
derricks. Handling from hoist to form may be direct in buckets, by carts
or wheelbarrows, or by cars. These several methods can be worked in
various combinations, and the following examples of plants show such
combinations as are most typical of current practice.

In any system of transportation it is getting the concrete to the hoist
and from hoist to form that eats up the money. Hoisting makes but a
small part of the total transportation cost, and, moreover, the
difference in cost of operation for different hoists is very small. Mr.
E. P. Goodrich states that on three buildings the actual costs for the
hoists installed and removed after the completion of the work were as
follows:

Platform hoist  $330
Bucket hoist     465
Derrick          225

In figuring on the form of hoist to be adopted, the capability of the
hoist for general service has to be kept in mind. Platform hoists and
derricks can be used for hoisting form lumber and reinforcing steel as
well as for hoisting concrete, while bucket hoists cannot be so used
except where they may be fitted with special carriages for lumber or
steel. On the other hand, the bucket hoist is usually the quickest
method of hoisting concrete, and it can readily be extended upward as
the work progresses. The last is true also of platform hoists. The use
of derricks necessitates frequent shifting for high work or else the
building of expensive staging to raise the derrick into a position to
command the final height of the building. The probable costs of moving
and extending must be allowed for in choosing the hoist to be used.

Direct discharge of the mixer into the hoisting bucket is, of course,
the ideal manner of transporting the concrete from mixer to hoist, and
this can generally be obtained by planning, particularly where bucket
hoists or derricks are employed. For platform hoists direct discharge is
impossible; it can be somewhat closely approached, however, where
conditions permit car tracks to be laid on the floors being built, so
that a car holding a batch of concrete can be run onto the platform,
hoisted and then run to shoveling boards near the forms that are being
filled. The successful use of such an arrangement of car tracks is
described in Chapter XX, but it was for handling concrete blocks. A
direct discharge from hoisting bucket to forms is frequently possible
where derricks are used for hoisting, but with bucket and platform
hoists, wheeling or carting is necessary.

Where wheeling or carting has to be done either at the bottom or at the
top of the hoist, or at both points, a great factor in the economy of
work is the arranging of the operations in cycles. For example, in
wheeling concrete to forms from a hopper fed by a bucket hoist, arrange
the runways so that each man makes a circuit, passing by the form at one
end and by the hopper at the other end, and goes and comes by a
different route. The speed gained by avoiding confusion and delay saves
many times the additional cost of runways which is small. In fact it is
economy to employ a few extra men to arrange runways and keep them
clean, because of the additional speed thus gained. Good organization
effects more economy than special methods of hoisting as far as the
labor of handling the concrete is concerned.

[Illustration: Fig 214.--Bucket Hoist for Building Work
(Wallace-Lindesmith).]

~Bucket Hoists.~--A bucket hoist construction which has been extensively
used in building work on the Pacific coast is shown by the drawings of
Figs. 214 to 216. Two T-bar guides made in sections connected by
fishplates furnish a track for an automatic dumping bucket hoisted and
lowered by steel cable from engine on the ground to head sheaves as
shown. The sectional construction of the T-bar guides permits the hoist
to be any height desired, it being lengthened and shortened by adding
and taking out sections. The bucket is dumped automatically at any point
desired by means of a tripping device attached to a chute which receives
the contents of the bucket and delivers them to carts, wheelbarrows, or
other receptacle. The hoist is set outside of the building with the
mixer arranged, if possible, to discharge directly into the bucket. By
setting the guide frame in a pit or on blocking any height of edge of
bucket can be secured. The buckets are ordinarily 13½ or 20 cu. ft.
capacity. It is recommended, when greater hoisting capacity is
necessary, to use two hoists set side by side and operated by one cable
in the same manner as double wheelbarrow cages; as the weight of one
bucket counterbalances the weight of the other, the power required for
hoisting is reduced. To adapt this hoist to handling form lumber the
bucket is replaced by the lumber carriage shown by Fig. 216; this
carriage discharges over the head of the mixer and the spring buffer
shown by Fig. 214 is to take the shock of the rising carriage. This
buffer is omitted when concrete only is to be hoisted. In one case this
device has hoisted 520 batches of 12 cu. ft. each to the fourth floor in
8 hours, or nearly 19 cu. yds. per hour. In another case 65 trips per
hour were averaged to the fifth floor with a 12-cu. ft. load each trip;
this is nearly 30 cu. yds. per hour. With the lumber carriage 8 men have
unloaded 14,000 ft. B. M. of 2×10-in. stuff from car to the second floor
and distributed it in 43 minutes. A ½-cu. yd. combination outfit for
concrete and lumber, with 40 ft. of guide track, weighs 1,750 lbs.,
without the lumber carriage the outfit weighs 1,600 lbs. This hoist is
made by the Wallace-Lindesmith Co., Los Angeles, Cal.

[Illustration: Fig, 215.--Wallace-Lindesmith Hoist Bucket in Discharging
Position.]

[Illustration: Fig. 216.--Lumber Carriage for Wallace-Lindesmith Hoist.]

[Illustration: Fig. 217.--Mixer Plant with Gravity Feed from Material
Bins to Hoisting Bucket.]

A popular construction for automatic bucket hoists is that shown by
Figs. 217 and 218 by Mr. E. L. Ransome. The bucket is held upright by
guides at its front and rear edges; to dump it a section of the front
guide is removed at the desired dumping point which allows the bucket to
overturn as shown. A friction crab hoist operated from the mixer engine
runs the bucket. The mixer is located as shown. Figure 218 shows the
foot of the hoist set in a pit with the mixer at surface level, but the
hoist can be set on the surface and the mixer mounted on a platform. In
the latter case a charging bucket, traveling from stock pile up an
inclined track to the mixer platform, is generally used. A hoist like
that illustrated, equipped with a ½-cu. yd. Ransome mixer, will cost
about $1,500 and will deliver 15 cu. yds. of concrete per hour. Mr. F.
W. Daggett gives the following figures of the cost of operation:

  Mixing Gang:
                     Total 1 hr.
1 mixer foreman, also engineer, 25c.         $.25
1 man charging mixer, 20c.                    .20
1 man running hoist, 20c.                     .20
2 men wheeling sand, 17½c.                    .35
4 men wheeling and shoveling stone, 17½c.     .70
1 man helping up runway, 17½c.                .17½
2 men carrying cement, 17½c.                  .35

  Gang Placing Cement:

1 foreman, 25c.                               .25
9 men wheeling concrete, 17½c.               1.57½
3 men tamping concrete, 17½c.                 .52½
1 man filling carts, 17½c.                    .17½
                                            ------

  Total labor cost per hour                 $4.75

Fuel, etc.                                    .50
                                            ------
                                             5.25

This gives a cost of 35 cts. per cu. yd. for mixing and placing
concrete.

In this particular case the mixer was charged by wheelbarrows.
Frequently the stone and sand bins can be arranged to chute the
materials directly into the charging hopper as shown by Fig. 217. In
place of barrows two-wheeled carts of the type shown by Fig. 12 can be
used. Mention has already been made of operating the charging bucket on
an incline from stock pile to mixer. Such arrangements are described in
Chapter IV.

[Illustration: Fig. 218--Bucket Hoist for Building Work (Ransome).]

In constructing a 9-story store at St. Paul, Minn., the concrete was
hoisted by continuous bucket elevators. A lay-out of the construction
plant is shown by Fig. 219. In the alley near the center of the north
side of the building the surface grade was about 6 ft. above the third
story level. A hopper was constructed at grade and provided with two
chutes running to the basement. These chutes discharged on opposite
sides of a vertical partition separating the sand and stone bins, and by
closing either chute at its top by a suitably arranged deflector plate
either sand or stone could be dumped into the same hopper and chuted to
its proper bin. Cement was brought to the work in cars over the tracks
shown and was wheeled from the cars over runways leading to the charging
platforms near each mixer. Other runways connecting with these platforms
provided for wheeling the sand and stone to the mixers. The runways were
placed at the proper height to permit the barrows to be emptied directly
into the charging hoppers. Two Smith mixers were used, located as shown,
and each discharged through a chute into one of the bucket elevator
boots. There were two elevators which were "raised" two stories at a
move as the work progressed. Each elevator discharged into a hopper
holding 1½ batches, and from these hoppers the concrete was fed into
wheelbarrows and wheeled to the forms. The bucket elevators were carried
no higher than the eighth floor. When this floor had been completed the
hoppers were moved down to the fifth floor and the wheelbarrows were
taken to platform elevators and carried to the remaining floors and
roof. Special 4-cu. ft. wheelbarrows were used for handling the
concrete. A maximum of 155 cu. yds. of concrete was mixed, transported
and placed in a 10-hour day with a gang of 28 men.

~Platform Hoists.~--The common builders' hoist or elevator, operating
single or double platforms or cages, needs no special description. The
wheelbarrow, cart or car containing the concrete is run onto the
platform, hoisted and then run to the forms. The chief advantage of this
device in concrete work is that it will handle all classes of material
without any change of carriage or arrangement, it can thus be used for
handling form lumber and reinforcing steel as well as for handling
concrete.

[Illustration: Fig. 219.--Plan of Concrete Mixing and Handling Plant for
9-Story Building.]

~Derricks.~--The use of derricks for hoisting in concrete building work is
limited by the necessity of supporting them independently of the
structure being built; the formwork or the completed concrete work
cannot be utilized to carry derricks during construction. For low
structures the derrick can be set on the ground, but for high buildings
a supporting tower or staging is necessary. The arrangement of such
falsework can be illustrated best by specific examples.

In constructing a 7-story factory at Cincinnati, O., concrete was mixed
on the ground and hoisted by a derrick with an 80-ft. boom mounted on a
tower 55 ft. high. The derrick was located to one side of the building.
For the lower floors the boom swing covered so large an area that the
bucket was dumped at various places, but for the upper floors it was
found more economical to dump buckets into a hopper from which
wheelbarrows were filled. By this plan less time was consumed in placing
the bucket and no tag rope man was required, as the engineman could
swing the boom to a certain point on the wall which would bring the
bucket directly over the hopper. A Smith mixer discharged directly into
derrick buckets, which rested on a track long enough to hold two
buckets. The buckets were filled and emptied alternately by shuttling
the truck and attaching first one and then the other to the derrick.

In constructing an 11-story and basement office building in New York
City a four-legged tower starting from the bottom of the excavation was
erected at about the center of the lot. It was built of timber and
extended upward as the progress of the work demanded until it overtopped
the roof 11 stories above the street. The tower was square in plan and
was divided into stories corresponding approximately to the several
stories of the building. A floor was constructed in the tower at each
story to be used in storing materials. For hoisting a 75-ft. boom was
swung from each leg of the tower, each boom being operated by a separate
engine and having a nominal capacity of 5 tons. The four booms covered
the whole building area and were kept about two stories above the work
by being shifted upward as the work progressed. This arrangement of
derricks was used to handle the steel, lumber and concrete, the building
being built up around the tower, which was so located that its only
interference with the building structure was in the shape of square
holes left in the floor slabs to accommodate the tower legs.

In constructing an 8-story warehouse covering some three acres of ground
in Chicago, Ill., the derrick plant shown by Figs. 220 to 222 was
installed. Some 7,500 tons of reinforcing steel, 125,000 cu. yds. of
concrete and 4,000,000 ft. of form lumber had to be handled.
Incidentally it is worth noting that there were about 120 lbs. of
reinforcing steel and 32 ft. B. M. of form lumber used per cubic yard of
concrete.

The controlling conditions governing the arrangement and character of
the construction plant were as follows: The building, to be built
entirely of reinforced concrete, was 135 ft. high. Its west front
abutted on the river and its south front on the street; at the north
end there was some ground available for plant and along the east front
there was a strip about 20 ft. wide between the building wall and the
main line tracks of a railway. At best, therefore, the area outside of
the building and available for plant and storage was limited, while
inside the building area the contractor was confronted by the insistence
of the architect that an unbroken monolithic construction be obtained as
nearly as possible, by reducing the floor openings for construction work
to a minimum. The sketch plan, Fig. 220, shows the plant designed to
meet the conditions.

To get the large amount of construction material onto the work a side
track was built along the 20-ft. area on the east side of the building
and another was turned into the area at the north end of the building.
These side tracks handled all construction materials coming onto the
work. Over the first there were built two sets of storage bins for sand
and gravel and all concrete materials brought in in carload lots are
unloaded at these two points, as will be described further on. Lumber
for forms and steel for reinforcement shipped in similar manner were
taken by the second siding to the lumber yard and steel mill at the
north end of the building.

[Illustration: Fig. 220.--Plan of Concrete Mixing and Handling Plant for
Large Warehouse Building.]

The raw materials after being worked up in the mixer plants and the saw
and steel mills were distributed over the work by an industrial railway.
The track system of this railway is shown by the dotted lines; it was
located on the basement floor, with rampes leading to the No. 1 mixer
plant and to the saw and steel mill tracks. The two main lines of track
passed close to or under the elevator and stairway shaft openings in the
several floors. This permitted the derrick buckets, lowered and hoisted
through the shafts, to be loaded directly from the car tracks. All mixed
concrete, forms and reinforcing frames were distributed by this railway
to the several shafts and thence hoisted and placed by the derrick
plant.

[Illustration: Fig. 221.--Derrick for Handling Concrete for Large
Warehouse Building.]

The derrick plant consisted of four derricks arranged as shown by the
circles in Fig. 220. The view, Fig. 221 shows the first derrick
installed and illustrates the general construction quite clearly.
Briefly the derrick consisted of a vertical steel-work tower 10 ft.
square and 85 ft. high, within which operated a steel mast 135 ft. high
and carrying an 80-ft. boom connected just above the tower. The mast was
pivoted at the bottom and had rollers turning against a horizontal ring
inside the tower at the top. It was operated by a bull wheel above the
top of the tower, the turning ropes running down inside the mast to the
foot block and thence horizontally to the operating motor. The topping
and hoisting lines also followed this route. The top of the tower was
guyed by four ropes to anchorages in the basement floor. The boom
commanded a circle 170 ft. in diameter and could lift 150 ft. above the
base of the mast. The derrick was operated by a 25-HP. double drum
electric hoist with a derrick swinging spool; this hoist was set on the
basement floor. It will be noted that the guys are below the bull wheel
so that the boom has a clear swing through a complete circle.

As stated above, four of these derricks were employed. Together they did
not cover the entire building area, but by the use of a derrick bucket
so designed that it could be used as a storage bin for feeding
wheelbarrows, it was found possible to keep the number of derricks down
to four.

This derrick plant possessed several advantages of importance. In the
first place the derricks would handle all classes of material--concrete,
forms, steel frames--equally well and could be transferred from one
class of work to the other with practically no delay. In the second
place, for a large area of the building, they handled the material from
the basement direct to the place it was to occupy in the work, and did
it in one operation. Finally they permitted the handling and erection
of the forms and reinforcement in large units. Thus a column form would
be assembled complete at the mill, moved as a unit by car to the proper
shaft and then hoisted and set in place as a unit by the derrick. Girder
forms, floor slab forms, girder and column reinforcing, etc., could be
similarly assembled and handled. The derricks occupied only the area of
four floor panels, the remainder of the area of each floor was left
unobstructed for the work to be done. No materials or supplies needed be
stored on the floors until they were in perfect condition to accommodate
them, and not then, even, so far as the prosecution of form erection and
concreting were concerned.

The sand and gravel for concrete were brought in by bottom or side dump
gondola cars from pits located about 30 miles out on the Chicago,
Milwaukee & St. Paul Ry. The cars were switched onto the main side track
and unloaded under the bins which straddle this track. A receiving
hopper, with its top at rail level and long enough to permit two cars to
be unloaded at once, received the sand or gravel and distributed it
through twelve gate openings onto an 18-in. horizontal belt conveyor 65
ft. long. This conveyor discharged into a second conveyor, 133 ft. long,
which ran up a 22° incline, extending away from the bins and discharged
onto a third conveyor 117 ft. long, which doubled back on a 22° incline
reaching to and over the top of the bins. This third conveyor had two
fixed trippers and an end discharge to distribute its cargo. All three
conveyors were operated by a 35-HP. motor located at the junction of the
two inclined conveyors, both of which were driven from the same shaft. A
chain belt from the idler shaft of the first incline conveyor to the
driving shaft of the horizontal conveyor operated that unit of the
plant. This belt was operated as a cross belt by reversing alternate
links. No manual labor was required to handle the sand and gravel from
the cars to the storage bins.

The mixer arrangement at the two bins differed. At the No. 1 bins the
mixer was located as shown in Fig. 220, close to the bin. Chutes led
directly from the sand and gravel bins to the charging hopper and the
bags of cement were stacked alongside this hopper. The mixer discharged
either directly into the bucket of the first derrick or into cars for
transportation on the railways. At the No. 2 bins a belt conveyor took
the concrete materials down into the basement to a mixer located close
enough to one of the distribution tracks to permit it to discharge
directly into the cars.

[Illustration: Fig. 222.--Special Concrete Bucket for Large Warehouse
Building.]

The derrick buckets by which the concrete was hoisted and handled to the
work were of special construction. A bucket was desired which would
serve several distinct purposes. It must first be able to hold a full
mixer batch of material, since, with the derrick arrangement, economy in
hoisting necessitated hoisting in large units and also because storage
capacity was required of the bucket for wheelbarrow work. The four
derricks did not command the entire area of a floor; there were corners
and other irregular areas outside of the circles covered by the several
booms over which the concrete must be distributed by barrows or carts.
A bucket large enough to supply the barrows, while a second bucket was
being lowered, charged from the mixer and hoisted, was required. In the
second place, a bucket was required whose contents could be discharged
all at once or in smaller portion at will. Finally a bucket was desired
which could be made to distribute its load along a narrow girder form or
in a thin sheet for a floor slab.

To meet these requirements the bucket shown in Fig. 222 was designed. It
held 42 cu. ft., or about 1.55 cu. yds. of concrete. It had a hopper
bottom terminating in a short rectangular discharge spout closed by a
lever operated under cut gate, which could be opened as much or as
little as desired. To the underside of the bucket there was attached a
four-leg frame in which the bucket stood when not suspended. Ordinarily,
that is within the circles commanded by the derricks, the buckets were
discharged suspended and directly into the forms, the character of the
discharge gate permitting a thin sheet to be spread for floor slabs or a
narrow girder or wall form to be filled without spilling or shock. For
wheelbarrow work outside the reach of the derricks the mode of procedure
was as follows: A timber platform about 3 ft. high and having room for
standing two buckets was set just on the edge of the circle commanded by
the derrick boom. Two buckets were used. A full bucket was hoisted and
set on the platform, with its spout overhanging. This bucket served as a
storage bin for feeding the wheelbarrows while the second bucket was
being lowered, charged and hoisted to take its place on the platform,
and serve in turn as a storage hopper.

~PLACING AND RAMMING.~--A wet concrete is usually used in building work
except on occasions, for exterior wall work and except for pitch roof
work, where a wet mixture would run down the slope. Placing and tamping
are therefore, essentially pouring and puddling operations. The pouring
should be done directly from the barrows, carts, or buckets if possible;
dumping onto shoveling boards and shoveling makes an extra operation and
increases the cost by the wages of the shoveling gang. Where shoveling
boards are necessary, take care that they are placed close to the forms
being filled, as it is wasteful of time to carry concrete in shovels,
even for a half dozen paces. Before pouring any concrete, the inside of
the forms should be wet down thoroughly with a hose or sprinkler, if a
hose stream is not available. The final inspection of forms and
reinforcement just before concreting will have made certain that they
are ready for the concrete, so far as line and level of forms and
presence and proper arrangement of the reinforcement are concerned, but
the concrete foreman must watch that no displacement occurs in pouring
and puddling, and must make certain particularly that the forms are
clean.

In pouring columns it is essential that the operation be continuous to
the bottom of the beam or girder. It is also advisable to pour columns
several hours ahead of the girders. Puddling should be thorough, as its
purpose is to work the concrete closely around the reinforcement and
into the angles of the mold and to work out air bubbles. A tool
resembling a broad chisel is one of the best devices for puddling or
slicing. In slab and girder construction, the pouring should be
continuous from bottom of girder to top of slab. Work should never be
stopped-off at horizontal planes. As in columns, careful puddling is
essential in pouring beams. In slab work, the concrete is best compacted
by tamping or rolling. A broad faced rammer should be used for tamping
wet concrete, or a wooden roller covered with sheet steel, weighing
about 250 lbs., and having a 30-in. face.

Theoretically, concreting should be a continuous operation, but
practically it cannot be made so. Bonding fresh concrete to concrete
that has hardened, though it has been done with great perfection by
certain methods as described in Chapter XXIV, must still be held as
uncertain. Ordinarily, at least, a plane of weakness exists where the
junction is made and in stopping off work it should be done where these
planes of weakness will cause the least harm. Experts are by no means
agreed on the best location of these planes, but the following is
recognized good practice. Work once started, pouring a column, should
not be stopped until the column is completed to the bottom of the
girder. For beams and girders; stop concrete at center of girder with a
vertical face at right angles to the girder, or directly over the center
of the columns; in beams connecting with girders, stop concrete at
center of span, or directly over center of connecting girder; stop
always with a vertical face and never with a sloping face, and never
with a girder partly filled. For slabs; stop concrete at center of span,
or directly over middle of supporting girder or beam; stop always with
vertical joints. If for any cause work must be stopped at other points,
than those stated, the fresh concrete and the hardened concrete must be
bonded by one of the methods described in Chapter XXIV.

~CONSTRUCTING WALL COLUMNS FOR A BRICK BUILDING.~--The columns, 12 in
number, were constructed to strengthen the brick walls of a power
station and were built as shown by Figs. 223 and 224, one at a time. The
staging, 50 ft. high and 4×6 ft. in plan, was erected against the wall
which had been shored, a portion of the wall was cut out and forms
erected and the concrete column substituted for the section of wall
which was removed. The staging was then moved into position for another
column.

[Illustration: Fig. 223.--Section of Rectangular Wall Column.]

Two men, with sledge and drill, cut out the brick work amounting to
about 12 cu. yds. for each column in 15 hours, at a cost of about 70
cts. per cu. yd., including removal to the street. The cost of moving
and re-erecting the scaffolding was $2.94 per each move. The character
of the reinforcement is shown by Fig. 223; it was erected as the
concreting progressed, the main bars being in sections 15 ft. long,
spliced with and distanced by side bars and cross bolts at the splices.

[Illustration: Fig. 224.--Staging and Forms Used in Building Column
Shown by Fig. 223.]

The concrete was hand mixed in 6-cu. ft. batches at the foot of the
column, by three men with a fourth turning over and filling the buckets.
The buckets, 12 ins. in diameter and 16 ins. high, were hoisted by a
pulley line arranged as shown and pulled by a mule driven by a man, at
$1 per day for the mule and $1.50 for the man, the cost of hoisting
being 25 to 40 cts. per cu. yd., depending on the rapidity of the man
inside the form. This man tamped the concrete which was emptied from the
buckets by a man on the scaffolding. Each batch raised the level in the
form 15 ins., and between batches a set of ties for the column rods was
placed by the man during the tamping. It took from 1½ to 2 days to
concrete a column of 12 cu. yds. The concrete was a 1-3.8-5.7 limestone
screenings mixture, mixed wet enough to be easily pushed into the forms
and worked around the reinforcement. The form construction is shown by
Fig. 224. The form for one column required 650 ft. B. M. of lumber, and
on an average, each form was used twice. As a matter of fact, the side
strips and outside braces were used three times, while much of the
7/8-in. sheathing was destroyed by being used once. The lumber for
shoring cost $23 per M. ft. B. M., and the light lumber for forms cost
$18 per M. ft. B. M. All lumber was yellow pine. All labor was negro, at
15 cts. per hour; foremen who worked. 22½ cts. per hour. The cost of the
several parts of the work compiled from records furnished by Mr. Keith
O. Guthrie, engineer in charge, was as follows:

                                Cost per  Cost per
Concrete.                         column   cu. yd.

Lumber for forms                 $  4.81     $0.40
Setting up and removing forms      11.32      0.95
Cement, 10.17 bbls. at $2.40       24.40      2.03
Sand, 5.87 yds. at $0.90            5.28      0.44
Stone, 8.75 yds. at $1.35          10.94      0.91
Mixing and wheeling                15.73      1.31
Hoisting by mule with driver        4.80      0.40
Handling bucket on scaffold         2.93      0.25
Tamping inside column               2.93      0.25
Painting with grout                 3.89      0.32
Clearing away rubbish               1.97      0.16
Rigging, etc.                       2.64      0.21
Tools                               0.59      0.05
Moving scaffold                     2.94      0.25
Moving mix board and rigging hoist  1.62      0.14
                                  ------     -----
  Total cost of concrete          $96.79     $8.07

                                Cost per       Cost cts. per
Reinforcement.                   column.       lb. of bars.
Iron bars, 1,034 lbs.             $20.68          $2.00
Drilling iron bars                  1.44           0.14
Setting iron bars in place          1.23           0.12
Bolts for splicing and spacing      3.98           0.40
Wire cross ties at 2½,  cts. lb.    1.39           0.14
Labor forming 130 cross ties        1.13           0.11
                                  ------          -----
  Total cost of iron and steel    $29.85          $2.91

              Summary of Cost.

                               Per column.  Per cu. yd.
Concrete in place                 $96.79          $8.07
Steel in place                     29.85           2.49
Cutting out and removing brick      8.36           0.70
Shoring floors and roof, labor      5.87           0.49
Ditto for lumber used 3 times       3.44           0.29
                                 -------         ------
  Total                          $144.31         $12.04

[Illustration: Fig. 225.--Girder Plan for 6-Story Building.]

~FLOOR AND COLUMN CONSTRUCTION FOR SIX-STORY BUILDING.~--The building was
91×112 ft.; 56 columns spaced 16 ft. apart carried the girder system
shown by Fig. 225, which in turn supported a 3½-in. floor slab. The
walls and partitions were not concrete. The following records were kept
by the authors:

_Forms._--The column forms were built as shown by Fig. 226. The boards
were 1½-in. stuff, surfaced on four sides; the yokes were spaced 2 ft.
apart. The 1×6-in. pieces were nailed to the 2×4's with 8-d. nails with
heads left projecting for easy pulling. The girder forms, Fig. 227,
rested on the column forms and on intermediate posts half-way between
columns. These intermediate posts were 3×4's with 4×4×12-in. head blocks
nailed to their tops and wedges under their bottoms. The girder molds
were 1½-in. stuff, and to the side pieces were nailed 1×4-in. cleats;
the bottom and side pieces were connected by 3/8×4-in. lag screws spaced
28 ins. apart. The floor slab stringers were carried on the 1×4-in.
cleats; they were spaced 28 ins. apart and were not nailed; neither were
the 1×6-in. lagging boards nailed to the stringers. The point to be
noted is the design and construction of the forms so that they could be
put together and taken apart easily. The lumber required for forms for
one floor 91×112 ft., or, say, 10,200 sq. ft., was as follows:

Lumber for columns, ft. B. M.             9,000
Lumber for 10×10-in. beams, ft. B. M.     7,600
Lumber for 5×10-in. beams, ft. B. M.      2,700
Intermediate 3×4-in. posts, ft. B. M.     1,000
Lagging, 1×6-in. boards, ft. B. M.        9,000
Stringers, 3×4 ins., ft. B. M.            4,500
                                         ------
  Total ft. B. M.                        33,800

[Illustration: Fig. 226.--Column Form for 6-Story Building.]

In round numbers, we can say that 34,000 ft. B. M. of lumber were used
for 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area, or 3.4 ft. B. M. per 1 sq. ft. Enough
forms were provided to erect two complete floors; the forms for the
lower floor being removed and erected again for the second floor above,
thus using all the lumber three times. With carpenters at $3.50 for 8
hours, the forms were framed ready for erection for $4 per M. ft. B. M.
The lumber framed ready to erect cost them:

Lumber, cost per M. ft. B. M.                       $26.00
Labor, framing per M. ft. B. M.                       4.00
                                                    ------
Total per M. ft. B. M.                              $30.00

[Illustration: Fig. 227.--Girder and Slab Forms for 6-Story Building.]

Since the lumber was used three times, $30 ÷ 3 = $10 is the charge
against each 1,000 ft. B. M. needed to encase the concrete on a floor.
There were nearly 34,000 ft. B. M. per floor, hence the cost of lumber
ready for erection was $340 per floor. There were as shown below, 200
cu. yds. of concrete per floor, so that the cost was $340 ÷ 200 = $1.70
per cu. yd. of concrete for forms ready for erection. It took a gang of
5 men 7 days to tear down and carry up the forms for one floor; hence 5
× $2 × 7 = $70 per floor, or practically $2 per M. ft. B. M., or $0.35
per cu. yd. of concrete for taking down and carrying forms two stories.
It took a gang of 10 carpenters 7 days to erect these forms, which at
$3.50 per day was $245 per floor, or $7 per M. ft. B. M., or $1.20 per
cu. yd. of concrete.

_Concrete._--The amount of concrete per floor was as follows:

Floor slab 3½ ins. thick, 10,200 sq. ft.       110 cu. yds.
Beams, 10×10 ins.                               40 cu. yds.
Beams, 5×10 ins.                                20 cu. yds.
Columns, 15×15 ins. (average)                   30 cu. yds.
                                              -----
Total concrete per floor                       200 cu. yds.

A concrete mixer, a hoist and a gang of 14 men mixed and placed the
concrete for a floor in 7 days. At $2 per day for labor this gives 14 ×
7 × $2 = $196, or say $1 per cu. yd. for mixing and placing the
concrete.

_Reinforcement._--In each of the 10×10-in. beams there were 4, 1-in.
round rods, 2 straight and 2 bent, and stirrups of 1/8×1-in. straps
spaced 5 ins. apart at columns and 15 ins. at the center. In each
5×10-in. beam there was half as much steel as in a 10×10-in. beam. The
floor slab reinforcement consisted of ¼-in. rods spaced 5 ins. apart and
2 cross-rods in 7-ft. panel. The column reinforcement consisted of 4
rods averaging 1 in. in diameter. In round numbers the amount of steel
required for each floor was, therefore, as follows:

Lbs. steel rods in 10×10-in. beams                   16,200
Lbs. steel rods in 5×10-in. beams                     4,000
Lbs. stirrups in beams                                3,000
Lbs. steel rods in floor slabs                        3,800
Lbs. steel rods in columns                            1,400
                                                     ------
Total pounds steel per floor                         28,400


This is equivalent to 142 lbs. of steel per cubic yard of concrete, or
about 1 per cent of the total volume of reinforced concrete was steel.
The steel in the beams was about 3 per cent. It required a gang of 5
laborers 7 days at $2.25 per day, to bend and place the steel for each
floor or $86 for labor on 28,400 lbs. of steel. This is equivalent to
0.3 ct. per lb., or 45 cts. per cu. yd. of concrete.

_Summary of Costs._--Summarizing the figures given we have the following
cost per cubic yard of concrete in floors and columns:

                                                        Per cu. yd.
142 lbs. steel at 2½ cts.                                    $ 3.55
1 bbl. cement                                                  2.50
1 cu. yd. gravel                                               1.10
½ cu. yd. sand                                                 0.55
170 ft. B. M. lumber ready to erect at $10 (1/3 of $30)        1.70
170 ft. B. M. torn down at $2                                  0.35
170 ft. B. M. erected by carpenters at $7                      1.20
Mixing and placing concrete                                    1.00
Shaping and placing steel                                      0.45
Superintendence                                                0.25
                                                             ------
        Total                                                $12.65

~WALL AND ROOF CONSTRUCTION FOR ONE-STORY CAR BARN.~--The barn was 50 ft.
wide and 190 ft. long, divided into three rooms by two transverse
partitions and covered with a 4-in. roof having a pitch of ½ in. per
foot. The main walls were 12 ins. thick and the partition walls 10 ins.
thick. The main room 110 ft. long had four car tracks its whole length
with pits under each and a 6-in. reinforced concrete floor slab between.
The floor girders, one under each rail, were 12 ins. square, each
reinforced by three 1¾-in. rods, and were carried on 12×12-in. pillars.
The total yardage of concrete was 874 cu. yds. divided as follows:

Walls and foundations, cu. yds.                                614
Pillars and girders in track pits, cu. yds.                     44
Reinforced floors, cu. yds.                                     55
Roof                                                           160
                                                               ---
Total, cu. yds.                                                873

A 1-2½-5 concrete was used for floors, roofs and girders and a 1-3-6
concrete for foundations and walls. There were 26½ tons of reinforcing
steel, or 61 lbs. per cu. yd., or 0.45 per cent. of the volume of the
concrete was steel. The wages paid were: Foreman, $2.50; blacksmith, $2;
engineer, $1.75; laborers, $1.50; two-horse team and driver, $3.67;
one-horse team and driver, $2.92; carpenter, $2.25; carpenters worked 9
hours; all others 10 hours.

_Forms._--Carpenters framed and erected forms and common laborers under
foreman carpenter took them down. Lagging was all 2-in. stuff and
uprights 3×4-in. stuff. Props for roof forms were 18-ft. round timber
procured on the job. They were 6 ins. in diameter at the top and cost 50
cts. each, 91 being used. These props are not included in the lumber
listed below, but their cost is included in the costs given. No record
was kept of the number of times the lumber was used, but as 54,643 ft.
B. M. were bought and about twice this much would be needed to enclose
the concrete if used only once, we will assume that all lumber was used
twice. Including the props there were about 60,000 ft. B. M., or 70 ft.
B. M. per cu. yd. of concrete. The cost of the lumber was $1,520.86, and
the cost of labor on the forms was $1,660.60, so that the cost of forms
was:

  Item.   Per cu. yd. Per M. ft. Per sq. ft.
Lumber      $1.74      $13.50     $0.038
Labor        1.90       14.07      0.041
            -----      ------     ------
  Total     $3.64      $27.57     $0.079

If the lumber had been used only once the cost per cubic yard would have
been $5.38, and per M. ft. B. M., $41.07.

_Concrete._--A railway track was run the full length of the building
upon what was eventually the fourth track of the car barn and a Ransome
mixer was set up as close to the track as possible allowing a platform
to be built between it and the track. Cars were brought up to this
platform and the materials handled by wheelbarrows direct from cars to
mixer. Both platform and mixer were moved twice as the work progressed.
The concrete was taken by wheelbarrows on runways to the side walls. For
the roof it was hoisted by a horse by means of a mast having an arm with
a three-quarters swing; the barrows were hoisted direct using a hook for
the wheel and two rings for the handles.

The cost of the concrete for materials was:

1.1 bbl. cement at $1.21, per cu. yd.    $1.33
¾ ton sand at 75 cts., per cu. yd.        0.55
Aggregate, per cu. yd.                    0.88
61 lbs. steel at 1.9 cts., per cu. yd.    1.15
Lumber, 70 ft. B. M. at $27, per cu. yd.  1.74
                                         -----
  Total per cu. yd.                      $5.65

The cost of labor per cubic yard was:

Forms, per cu. yd.                         $1.900
Mixing, per cu. yd.                         0.210
Placing, per cu. yd.                        0.310
Finishing, per cu. yd.                      0.143
Handling cement, per cu. yd.                0.017
Handling sand, per cu. yd.                  0.104
Handling steel, per cu. yd.                 0.270
Handling aggregate, per cu. yd.             0.222
Coal, at $4.25 per ton, per cu. yd.         0.010
Foreman, per cu. yd.                        0.133
Teams and laying pipe line, per cu. yd.     0.087
                                           ------
  Total, per cu. yd.                       $3.406

Summarizing, we have the following cost per cubic yard:

Concrete materials, per cu. yd.         $2.76
Labor mixing and placing concrete        1.01
Forms, materials and labor               3.64
Reinforcement, materials and labor       1.42
Fuel, foreman and pipe line labor        0.23
                                        -----
Total, per cu. yd.                      $9.06

The cost for handling steel, making stirrups, welding, etc., was $8.90
per ton, or 0.45 ct. per lb.

_CONSTRUCTING WALL COLUMNS FOR A ONE-STORY MACHINE SHOP._--The building
was 53×600 ft.; each side wall consisted of 40 columns of channel
section carried on footings of channel section somewhat heavier than
that of the column. The columns were spaced 15 ft. on centers and each
was 7½ ft. wide so that there were 7½ ft. spaces between columns, which
were filled with 3-in. curtain walls extending 7½ ft. above the floor.
Figures 228 and 229 show the column and footing construction. Each
column contained 125 cu. ft., or 4.63 cu. yds. of 1-3-5 1-in. crushed
slag concrete above the footing and the costs given here relate only to
the columns above footings. In the 80 columns there were 370 cu. yds. of
concrete.

_Forms._--A column form is shown by Fig. 230; it contains approximately
1,000 ft. B. M. of lumber. Ten of these forms were used, so that 10,000
ft. B. M. of form lumber were required for 370 cu. yds. of concrete, or
27 ft. B. M. per cu. yd. of concrete. Each column had a superficial area
excluding ends of about 420 sq. ft., so that 420 × 80 = 33,600 sq. ft.
was the superficial area of all the columns and 10,000 ft. B. M. ÷
33,600 sq. ft. = 0.3 ft. B. M., or, say, 1/3 ft. B. M., of form lumber
was used per square foot of concrete enclosed. The cost of the forms per
1,000 ft. B. M., and, therefore, per form, was:

Lumber, 1,000 ft. B. M., at $31.75     $31.75
Labor constructing form                 16.39
                                       ------
Total per 1,000 ft. B. M.              $48.14

[Illustration: Fig. 228.--Channel Section Wall Column for Factory
Building.]

This gives us a cost per cubic yard of concrete for materials and labor
constructing forms of $480 ÷ 370 = $1.30, and per square foot of outside
wall area of $480 ÷ (146 × 80) = 4.1 cts.

The erection and taking down of the forms, owing to the weight of some
of the pieces, was done by means of special derricks. The footings were
brought to within ½ in. of grade and a tenon form of the exact shape of
the channel section of the column was placed on top and filled with
grout to a depth of 1 in. These tenons served as guides in setting the
column forms, and proved to be much quicker and more accurate than
points.

[Illustration: Fig. 229.--Footing for Wall Column Shown by Fig. 228.]

The forms were assembled on the ground and erected by a 35-ft. A-frame
derrick mounted on wheels. The construction is shown by Fig. 231. This
derrick had a capacity of about 4 tons and carried a Ransome friction
crab hoist driven by a 5 h.p. Meitz & Weiss kerosene oil engine. It was
the practice to set a number of forms before filling any. This enabled
the carpenter gang to be plumbing up the first form while the erecting
gang were setting others. The forms had to be very securely guyed and
braced to withstand the impact of the falling concrete. Very little
trouble was had in keeping them well lined up.

[Illustration: Fig. 230.--Form for Molding Wall Column Shown by Fig.
228.]

Two gangs were employed in assembling forms and a portion of the men in
each gang also shaped and placed the reinforcement and placed and tamped
the concrete in the forms so that no exact division of labor is
possible. The organization of these gangs and the wages paid were as
follows:

  Derrick Gang:

1 foreman, at 36 cts. per hour                  $ 3.94
1 crabman, at 30 cts. per hour                    2.70
2 topmen, at 27 cts. per hour                     4.86
2 bottom men, at 23 cts. per hour                 4.14
                                                ------
Total per 9-hour day                            $15.64

  Assembling Gang:

1 boss carpenter, at 47 cts. per hour           $ 4.23
2 carpenters, at 36 cts. per hour                 6.48
2 carpenters, at 30 cts. per hour                 5.40
2 carpenters' helpers, at 25 cts. per hour        4.50
4 men forming and placing reinforcing steel
  and rethreading bolts, at 23 cts. per hour      8.28
                                                ------
  Total per 9-hour day                          $28.89
                                                ------
  Grand total                                   $44.53

These gangs assembled and erected the molds and concreted 80 columns in
22 working days, including 2 days lost on account of cold weather, so
that 4 columns were completed per day of 9 hours. We can subdivide the
cost as follows:

  Item.                            Per cu. yd.

Erecting forms and concreting          $0.81
Assembling forms and reinforcement      1.56
                                       -----
Total                                  $2.37

Charging the 4 men placing reinforcement and rethreading bolts to
forming and placing reinforcement alone we can figure the cost of
fabrication and erection of reinforcement very closely. There were 160
lbs. of reinforcing steel in each column, hence $8.28 ÷ (160 × 4) = 1.3
cts., was the cost per pound of forming and placing it. This includes
handling.

The stripping of the forms was carried on by another gang using a
derrick similar to the first one described, except it could be of
lighter construction as it had to handle only the separate parts of each
form and not the forms assembled. The derrick shown in Fig. 232 was a
33-ft. A-frame, with wheels at the bottom of each leg. It had a friction
crab hoist driven by an electric motor, both of which were fastened to
the derrick frame between the shear legs.

[Illustration: Fig. 231.--Derrick for Erecting Wall Column Forms Shown
by Fig. 230.]

The operation of stripping required only four men and the crabman. The
outside flat panel was removed first, and left leaning up against the
concrete while the inside trough shaped panel was pried loose and
lowered onto the ground with its inside face uppermost. The side panels
being comparatively light, were stripped without the use of the derrick,
and these panels were assembled on the ground with the inside piece. The
derrick then picked up the outside panel again, and placed it in its
proper place. After the bolts were put in place, the assembled form was
moved on rollers to another point in the line of columns where it was
again erected. The arrangement of derricks for erecting and stripping
forms is shown in Fig. 233.

The gang stripping forms was made up as follows:

1 foreman, at 30 cts. per hour     $ 2.70
1 crabman, at 27 cts. per hour       2.43
1 topman, at 27 cts. per hour        2.43
2 bottom men, at 23 cts. per hour    4.14
                                   ------
  Total per 9-hour day             $11.70

[Illustration: Fig. 232.--Derrick for Stripping Wall Column Forms Shown
by Fig. 230.]

This gang of five men stripped 4 columns containing 18.52 cu. yds. of
concrete each day, so that the cost of stripping was $11.70 ÷ 18.52 =
62.7 cts. per cu. yd.

_Concrete._--The concrete was mixed in a No. 2 Ransome mixer and
delivered to the work in Ransome concrete carts. These carts were pushed
along a runway which terminated in a slight incline under the derrick so
that their contents could be emptied into the derrick buckets.

The concrete was hoisted in an 8-ft. bottom dump bucket, using the
derrick described above. It was necessary to stir up the concrete
thoroughly with long-handled slicers as it was being deposited in order
to prevent segregation. This expedient combined with a wet mixture and
tight molds was found to overcome this difficulty very effectually.

The gang mixing and wheeling concrete was made up as follows:

1 mixer foreman and engineer at 27 cts. per hour     $ 2.43
4 laborers charging mixer at 18 cts per hour           6.48
4 laborers wheeling concrete at 18 cts. per hour       6.48
                                                     ------
Total per 9-hour day                                 $15.39

This gang mixed and wheeled concrete for four columns, or 18.52 cu.
yds., hence the cost per cubic yard was 82.6 cts.

With cement at $1.60 per bbl., sand at $1 per cu. yd. and slag at $1.10
per cu. yd. the cost of materials per cubic yard of concrete was $3.

[Illustration: Fig. 233.--Arrangement of Derricks for Erecting and
Stripping Forms.]

Summarizing the above figures we have the following cost per cubic yard
of concrete in place:

  Item.                           Per cu. yd.
Concrete materials                     $3.00
Reinforcing steel                       0.73
Forms, lumber and framing               1.30
Forms, erecting and concreting          0.81
Forms, assembling and reinforcement     1.56
Forms, stripping                        0.63
Mixing and wheeling concrete            0.83
                                       -----
Total                                  $8.86

~CONSTRUCTING ONE-STORY WALLS WITH MOVABLE FORMS AND GALLOWS FRAMES.~--In
constructing the walls for an 85×30-ft. factory building at Old Bridge,
N. J., Mr. A. E. Budell made use of movable forms and gallows frames to
construct the curtain walls and columns in one piece. Each side wall was
built its full height in successive 50-ft. lengths by depositing the
concrete between two forms which were moved upward as the concreting
progressed. Fig. 234 indicates the mode of procedure. The form was
raised and lowered by means of two gallows frames fitted with blocks and
tackle. A steel cable, with a trolley affixed, extending from one frame
to the other, provided a convenient mode of hoisting material to the
form, and the gallows frames took the place of ladders for climbing onto
the structure. No scaffolding whatever was used and only one man was
required overhead to dump the buckets and tamp the concrete into place.

[Illustration: Fig. 234.--Gallows Frame Supporting Wall Form Panels for
One-Story Building.]

[Illustration: Fig. 235.--Details of Wall Form Panel for One-Story
Building.]

The two walls were carried up simultaneously, one form being shifted
into place and filled while the other was left in place until the
concrete was sufficiently hard. It was found that 18 hours was amply
sufficient to allow the concrete to set hard, after which the form was
removed and lifted to a higher level. Thus the men were continuously
engaged in lifting and filling first one form and then the other. The
average length of time required to remove, raise and fill one form was 5
to 6 hours. Thus, two forms could be raised and filled almost every day.
The construction of the forms and of the gallows frames is shown by
Figs. 234 and 235. The cost of one set of forms and gallows frames was
as follows:

320 ft. B. M. of 2×10 in.×10 ft. plank at $34      $ 10.88
150 ft. B. M. of 3×4 in.×16 ft. spruce at $33         5.25
135½ ft. B. M. 1×8 in. yellow pine at $30               4.08
335 ft. B. M. 1¼×6 in. spruce at $33                   11.05
4 posts 6×8 in.×26 ft. = 416 ft. B. M. at $30        12.48
4 sills 6×8 ins.×16 ft., 2 caps 6×6 ins.×9 ft.,
4 braces 6×6 ins.×16 ft. = 490 ft. B. M. at $30.     14.70
3 pieces 3×10 ins.×20 ft. = 150 ft. B. M. at $30      4.50
                                                       -------
  Total lumber (1,996.5 ft. B. M.)                     $ 62.94

  Accessories:

Bolts for trussing, 675 lbs. at 2 cts.                 $ 13.50
Iron guy rope and clips                                   7.00
Blocks                                                    8.00
One coil of ¾-in. rope                                   28.00
                                                       -------
  Total accessories                                    $ 56.50

  Labor making one outfit:
2 men, 8 days, at $2.75 per 9 hrs.                     $ 44.00
                                                       -------
  Grand total                                          $163.44

This sum covered the cost of forms for one side of the building 85 ft.
long and containing 150 cu. yds. of concrete, hence the cost of forms
was in round figures $1.10 per cu. yd. of concrete. Each cubic yard of
concrete required 1,997 ÷ 150 = 13-1/3 ft. B. M. of form lumber.

The concrete was a 1-2½-4½ mixture. A careful record for 15 days, showed
an average of 2.8 cu. yds. of concrete placed in 6 hours by a gang of
6.3 men. From this we can figure the cost of concrete in place to be
about as follows:

2.8 cu. yds. concrete at $3 for materials     $ 8.40
6.3 men 6 hours at 15 cts.                      5.67
1 foreman 6 hours at $4 per day                 2.00
                                              ------
  Total per cu. yd.                           $16.07

Thus the cost of concrete in place was $16.07 ÷ 2.8 = $5.73 per cu. yd.
Adding the cost of forms we get $5.73 + $1.10 = $6.83 per cu. yd. as the
cost for labor and materials in constructing forms and mixing and
placing concrete.

[Illustration: Fig. 236.--Detail of Column and Cantilever Column Footing
for Four-Story Garage.]

Offsets and molding decorations were easily made, although they were
quite numerous on the building in question, at least more so than would
ordinarily be the case in mill building construction. The offset of 1
ft. at every column was made very readily by sliding wooden shoulder
pieces into place on the inner face of the form, which pieces in turn
received 2-in. faced planking, the latter being slid into place from
above. Thus the entire system was collapsible and small alterations were
easily made whenever the form was shifted. Flat surfaces or offsets
could be obtained at will by either removing or setting in the shoulder
pieces. Molding effects were made on the front face of the wall by
tacking molding strips to the form wherever necessary. The entire work
was done with common labor and the finished building presented a smooth,
homogeneous surface which required very little dressing.

[Illustration: Fig. 237.--Details of Cantilever Girders for Mezzanine
Floor for Four-Story Garage.]

~FLOOR AND ROOF CONSTRUCTION FOR FOUR-STORY GARAGE.~--The building was
53×200 ft., and 4 stories high, with provision for 2 additional stories
in the design of footings and columns. Two rows of wall columns
connected by transverse girders carrying the floor and roof slabs made a
comparatively simple construction, except for a mezzanine floor carried
on cantilever beams and except for the use of cantilever footings;
these two special details are shown by Figs. 236 and 237. The amount of
concrete in the building was 1,910 cu. yds., distributed as follows:

                                 Cu. yds.

Footings, reinforced                  190
Columns, reinforced                   450
Floors and roof, reinforced         1,100
Floor on ground, not reinforced       170
                                    -----
  Total                             1,910

The amount of reinforcing metal used was 237 tons, distributed as
follows:

Item.                  Tons.    Lbs. per cu. yd.
Footings                42           442
Columns                 20            90
Floors and roof        175           318
                       ---           ---
  Total and average    237           272

This is equivalent to 2 per cent. of steel in 1,910 - 170 = 1,740 cu.
yds.

_Forms._--The total area of concrete covered by forms (1,740 cu. yds.)
was 94,000 sq. ft., distributed as follows:

Footings, sq. ft.                4,000
Columns, sq. ft.                20,000
Floors and girders, sq. ft.     70,000
                                ------
Total, sq. ft.                  94,000

For the work 50,000 ft. B. M. of old lumber was used and 170,000 ft. B.
M. of new lumber was bought, the cost being as follows:

50 M. ft. B. M. at $13 per M.    $  650
170 M. ft. B. M. at $26 per M.    4,420
                                 ------
220 M. ft. B. M. at $23          $5,070

This is equivalent to 126 ft. B. M. per cu. yd. of concrete. New forms
were made for each floor except the sides of the girder molds which were
re-used so far as they would fit, but the roof forms were made from
lumber used for the floors. In all no more than 20 per cent of the form
lumber was used a second time. In round figures new lumber was required
for 80,000 sq. ft. of concrete; this gives a cost for lumber of 6.4 cts.
per sq. ft. The construction of the column and floor forms is shown by
Fig. 238. A force of 15 carpenters at $4.40 per day under a foreman at
$35 per week erected and tore down forms; the carrying was done by
laborers at $1.70 per day working under a foreman at $35 per week;
carpenters worked an 8-hour and laborers a 10-hour day. Forms for one
floor were framed and erected in 8 to 10 days. The cost of forms for
1,740 cu. yds. and 80,000 sq. ft. of concrete and per M. ft. B. M. was
as follows:

  Item.                        Per cu. yd. Per sq. ft. Per M. ft.
Lumber                            $2.90       $0.064       $23.00
Framing, erecting and removing.    2.00 }                   15.67
                                        }      0.057
Handling lumber                    1.10 }                    8.70
                                   -----      ------       ------
  Totals                           $6.00      $0.121       $47.37

[Illustration: Fig. 238.--Column and Floor Forms for Four-Story Garage.]

The lumber had a considerable salvage value which is not allowed for in
the above figures.

_Concrete._--The concrete was a Portland cement, ¾-in. trap rock
mixture, mixed wet in two Chicago Improved Cube Mixers equipped with
charging buckets. The mixers were located on the ground floor, one at
the rear and one at the front of the building, both discharging directly
to a hoist. With a gang of 30 men at $1.70 per 10-hour day under a
foreman at $35 per week a floor was concreted in 2 days, the columns
being concreted the first day and the floor being concreted the second
day. The labor cost for mixing and placing concrete and for fabricating
and setting reinforcement was as follows:

  Item.                         Per cu. yd.
Mixing and placing concrete       $1.95
Erecting and setting steel         2.05
                                  -----
  Total                           $4.00

The cost of concreting includes the cost of granolithic surface for the
floor slabs. The girder reinforcement was made up into unit frames and
the frames were set as a unit, horses set over the molds being used to
suspend and lower them into place. The cost of $2.05 per cu. yd. is
equivalent to ¾ ct. per lb. Summarizing, we have the following cost for
materials and labor on forms and for labor mixing and placing concrete
and reinforcement:

                                Per cu. yd.
Lumber for forms                 $ 2.90
Labor on forms                     3.10
Labor on concrete                  1.95
Labor on steel                     2.05
                                  -----
  Total                          $10.00

This $10 total does not include the cost of the concrete nor of the
steel.




CHAPTER XX.

METHOD AND COST OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION OF SEPARATELY MOLDED MEMBERS.


This chapter deals exclusively with the methods and cost of molding and
erecting separately molded wall blocks, girders, columns and slabs. The
structural advantages and disadvantages of this type of construction as
compared with monolithic construction will not be considered. The data
given in succeeding paragraphs show how separate piece work has been
done and what it has actually cost to do it in a number of instances.

~COLUMN, GIRDER AND SLAB CONSTRUCTION.~--European engineers have developed
several styles of open web or hollow girder and column shapes, but in
America solid columns and girders have been used except in the
comparatively few cases where one of the European constructions has been
introduced by its American agents.

~Warehouses, Brooklyn, N. Y.~--In constructing a series of warehouses in
Brooklyn, N. Y., the columns and girders were molded in forms on the
ground. For molding the columns, forms consisting of two side pieces and
one bottom piece, were used, saving 25 per cent. in the amount of lumber
required for a column form, and doing away with yokes and bolts, since
only simple braces were required to hold the side forms in place. It was
found that the side forms could readily be removed in 24 to 48 hours,
thus considerably reducing the time that a considerable portion of the
form lumber was tied up. It was figured by Mr. E. P. Goodrich, the
engineer in charge of this work, that this possible re-use of form
lumber reduced the amount required another 50 per cent. as compared with
molding in place. Girders were molded like columns in three-sided forms;
the saving in form work was somewhat less than in the case of columns,
but it was material. In general, Mr. Goodrich states, the cost of
hoisting and placing molded concrete members is higher per yard than
when the concrete is placed wet. That is in mass before it is hardened.

[Illustration: Fig. 239.--Sketch Showing Forms and Reinforcement for
Visintini Girder.]

~Factory, Reading, Pa.~--In constructing a factory at Reading, Pa., an
open or lattice web type of girder invented by Mr. Franz Visintini and
extensively used in Austria was adopted; columns were molded in place in
the usual manner with bracket tops to form girder seats. The girders
were reinforced with three trusses made up of top and bottom chord rods
connected by diagonal web rods; one truss was located at the center of
the beam and one at each side. The method of molding was as follows: The
trusses were made by cutting the chord rods to length and threading the
web diagonals and verticals onto them. To permit threading the web
pieces were bent, when rods were used, with an eye at each end; when
straps were used the ends were punched with holes. The work was very
simple and was done mostly by boys in the machine shop of the company
for which the building was being erected. The girders were molded two at
a time in forms constructed as shown by the sketch. Fig. 239. A form
consisted of a center board, two side boards, two end pieces and the
proper number of cast iron cores, all clamped together by three yokes.
Triangular cast iron plates, A, were screwed to the bottom boards for
spacers. The side, center and end boards were then set up and the end
clamps were placed. The cast iron hollow cores, B, were then set over
the spacers, and the form was ready for pouring. A layer of concrete was
placed in the bottom of the mold and the first side truss was placed;
the concrete was then brought half way up and the middle truss was
placed; concreting was then continued up to the plane of the second side
truss which was placed and covered. Cores and forms were all cleaned and
greased each time they were used. The cores were removed first by means
of a lever device and generally within three or four hours after the
concrete was placed. The remainder of the form was taken down in two to
four days and the beam removed.

~Kilnhouse, New Village, N. J.~--In constructing a kiln house for a cement
works one story columns with bracket tops and 50-ft. span roof girders
were molded on the ground and erected as single pieces. The columns by
rough calculation averaged about 2 cu. yds. of concrete and 675 lbs. of
reinforcement each or about 337 lbs. of steel per cubic yard. The
girders averaged by similar calculation 5 cu. yds. of concrete and 2,260
lbs. of steel, or 452 lbs. per cubic yard of concrete. The average
weight of columns was thus not far from 41.3 tons and of girders fully
11 tons.

[Illustration: Fig. 240.--Arrangement for Molding Ten Single-Bracket
Columns.]

Several combinations of arrangements were used for molding the columns
and girders. For wall columns having one bracket the arrangement shown
by Fig. 240 was adopted. The concrete slab molding platform was covered
with paper, and on this the two outside and the middle columns were cast
in forms. When those columns had set the forms were removed, the
intervening spaces were papered and the two remaining columns were cast.
Ten columns, five sets of two columns in line, were cast on each base.
The remaining columns were cast in combination with girders as shown by
Fig. 241. The two outside lines of columns (1) were molded in forms,
allowed to stand until set and then stripped. Using a column surmounted
by a shallow side form for one side and a full depth side form for the
other side molds were fashioned for the two outside girders, Nos. 2 and
3. One full depth side form and the side of girder No. 2 formed the mold
for girder No. 4. Girder No. 5 was then molded between girders No. 3 and
No. 4.

[Illustration: Fig. 241.--Arrangement for Molding Four Four-Bracket
Columns and Four Roof Girders]

[Illustration: Fig. 242.--Forms for 50-ft. Roof Girders.]

The construction of the girder forms is shown by Fig. 242. This drawing
shows one of the four main sections making up a complete form. A full
size form of this construction contained about 1,100 ft. B. M. of
lumber, and three were built, so that 3,300 ft. B. M. of form lumber
were used for molding 20 girders, or 33 ft. B. M. per cubic yard of
concrete. A full size column form contained about 225 ft. B. M. of
lumber, and eight were constructed, so that 1,800 ft. B. M. of form
lumber were used for molding 56 columns, or about 16 ft. B. M. per cubic
yard of concrete.

The following was the cost of erecting a full column form including
lining, plumbing, bracing and yoking, but excluding lumber and original
construction:

1 carpenter, 3 hrs., at $0.25           $0.750
1 helper, 3 hrs., at $0.175              0.525
1 helper, 1 hr., at $0.175               0.175
1-5 boss carpenter, 3 hrs., at $0.30     0.180
                                        ------
  Total                                 $1.630

This gives a cost of $7.25 per M. ft. B. M. for erecting column forms.

The cost of erecting a full size girder form including lining, plumbing,
bracing and setting six bolts was as follows:

2 carpenters, 5 hrs., at $0.25        $2.50
2 helpers, 5 hrs., at $0.175           1.75
2 laborers, ½ hr., at $0.15            0.15
¼ boss carpenter, at $0.30             0.375
                                      ------
  Total                               $4.775

This gives a cost of $4.35 per M. ft. B. M. for erecting girder forms.

The reinforcement was erected inside the forms for both columns and
girders. The cost of erection for one column was:

2 laborers, 4 hrs., at $0.15       $1.20
1/3 foreman, 4 hrs., at $0.225      0.30
                                   -----
Total                              $1.50

This gives a cost of about 0.22 cts. per pound for erecting column
reinforcement, including the bending of the horizontal ties or hoops.
The girder reinforcement was erected by piece work at a cost of $1.80
per girder--or about 0.08 ct. per pound.

The concrete used was a 1-6 mixture of Portland cement and crusher run
stone all passing a ½-in. sieve and 10 per cent. passing a 200 mesh
sieve. No trouble was had in handling this fine aggregate. It was mixed
in a Ransome mixer, elevated so as to deliver the batches into cars on a
standard gage track. This track ran between the base slabs on which the
molding was done. Each car held about 3 cu. yds. and discharged through
a side gate and spout directly into the forms, the mixture being made so
wet that it would flow readily. The company used its own cement and
stone for concrete and charged up the cement at $1 per barrel and the
stone at 60 cts. per cubic yard. At these prices, and assuming that a
cubic yard of concrete of the mixture above described would contain
about 1.25 bbl. of cement and 1.5 cu. yd. of stone, we have the
following cost of materials per cubic yard of concrete:

1.25 bbls. of cement, at $1      $1.25
1.5 cu. yds. stone, at $0.60      0.90
                                 -----
Total                            $2.15

The actual cost of mixing the concrete and delivering it to the cars was
as follows:

  Item.                 Per cu. yd.
1 foreman, at 20 cts per hour                 $0.0300
3 men shoveling stone, at 15 cts. per hour     0.0675
3 men filling hopper, at 15 cts. per hour      0.0675
1 man bringing cement, at 18 cts. per hour     0.0225
1 man dumping cement, at 15 cts. per hour      0.0225
9 h.p., at ½ ct. per h.p. hour                 0.0450
Superintendence, repairs, etc.                 0.0270
                                              -------
Total                                         $0.2820

The cost of hauling the concrete from mixer to forms ran about 2.7 cts.
per cubic yard, so that we have a cost for concrete in place of:

Concrete materials, per cu. yd.            $2.150
Mixing concrete, per cu. yd.                0.281
Hauling concrete, per cu. yd.               0.027
                                           ------
Total cost, per cu. yd.                    $2.458

The cost, then, per column or girder molded, assuming that it was
necessary to erect a full form, was about as follows:

  Columns:
2 cu. yds. concrete, at $2.46          $ 4.92
675 lbs. steel, at 2½ cts.              16.77
Erecting steel, at 0.22 ct. per lb.      1.50
Erecting forms                           1.63
                                       ------
  Total                                $24.82

  Girders:
5 cu. yds. concrete, at $2.46          $12.30
2,260 lbs. steel, at 2½ cts.         56.50
Erecting steel, at 0.08 ct. per lb.      1.80
Erecting forms                           4.77
                                        -----
Total                                  $75.37

[Illustration: Fig. 243.--View Showing Method of Hoisting Molded
Columns.]

These figures give a unit cost of $12.41 per cu. yd. for molded columns,
and of $15.07 per cu. yd. for molded girders, The columns were erected
by a Browning locomotive crane, which lifted and carried them to the
work and up-ended them into place. To facilitate lifting the columns
from the molding bed a 1½-in. pipe 8 ins. long was cast into both ends;
pins inserted into these sockets provided hitches for the tackle. The
column was lifted off the molding bed and blocked up, then iron clamps
were attached, one at each end, as shown by Fig. 243. A gang of 1
foreman and 14 men erected from 5 to 7, or an average of 6 columns per
10-hour day. The average wages of the erecting gang were 21 cts. per
hour. The cost then of column erection was (14 × $2.10) ÷ 6 = $5.25 per
column, or $2.63 per cu. yd. of concrete.

[Illustration: Fig. 244.--Sketch Showing Sling for Erecting 50-ft. Roof
Girders.]

The roof girders had 1-in. eye-bolts 24 ins. long cast into them
vertically about 4 ft. from the ends. They were lifted off the molding
bed by tackle by the locomotive crane to these eye-bolts and blocked up
to permit the adjustment of the sling. This sling is shown by the
sketch, Fig. 244, and as will be observed acts as a truss. At first it
was used without the vertical, but the cantilever action of the
unsupported ends caused cracks. The girders were loaded onto cars by the
locomotive crane and taken to the work, where they were hoisted and
placed by a gin pole. The girder erecting gang consisted of 1 foreman
and 14 men, working a 10-hour day at 21 cts. per hour. This gang erected
four girders per day, at a cost of (15 × $2.10) ÷ 4 = $7.87 per girder,
or $1.57 per cu. yd. of concrete.

The cost of girders and columns in place was thus about as follows:

  Columns:     Per unit.     Per cu. yd.
Molding          $25.00       $12.50
Erecting           5.25         2.63
                 ------       ------
  Totals         $30.25       $15.13

  Girders:

Molding          $75.00       $15.00
Erecting           7.87         1.57
                 ------       ------
  Totals         $82.87       $16.57

[Illustration: Fig. 245.--View Showing Method of Handling Roof Slabs.]

In this same building the roof was composed of 12×6¼ ft.×4-in. slabs
molded in tiers; a slab was molded and when hard was carpeted with paper
and the form moved up and a second slab molded on top of the first. This
operation was repeated until a tier of slabs had been molded. By molding
each slab with a 3-in. overlap, as shown by Fig. 245, they could be
easily separated by lifting on hooks inserted under the overhanging
ends. Each slab contained 0.925 cu. yd. of concrete and about 116¾ lbs.
of reinforcement. The cost of molding one roof slab, including
materials, forms and labor, was as follows:

  Materials:                     Per slab.      Per cu. yd.
1 bbl. cement, at $1                $1.000        $1.081
1.06 tons stone, at $0.60            0.636         0.687
116¾ lbs. steel, at 2¼ cts.          2.647         2.862
                                    ------        ------
  Total                             $4.283        $4.630

  Forms:
Lumber and making                   $0.104       $0.112
92 sq. ft. paper, at 33-1/3
cts. per 500 sq. ft.                 0.055        0.059
Labor erecting and removing          0.5625       0.608
                                    -------      ------
  Total                             $0.7215      $0.779

  Mixing, Hauling and Placing:
Mixing                              $0.222       $0.240
Hauling                              0.025        0.027
Placing concrete and steel           0.170        0.183
                                    ------       ------
  Total                             $0.417       $0.450

  General Expenses:
Housing and heating                 $0.700       $0.757
Superintendence, power, etc. (10%)   0.612        0.661
                                    ------       ------
  Total                             $1.312       $1.418
  Grand totals                      $6.7335      $7.277

The roof slabs were raised from the casting beds by means of the
locomotive crane and hooks, as shown by Fig. 245, and loaded onto cars;
eight slabs made a carload. The cars were run to the work, where the gin
poles hoisted the slabs one at a time to cars running on a track built
on timbers laid on top of the roof girders. A small derrick on rafters
picked the slabs from the hand car and set them in place. A gang of 15
men erected from 18 to 20 slabs per 10-hour day. With average wages at
21 cts. per hour the cost of erection was (15 × $2.10) ÷ 19 = $1.66 per
slab, or $1.79 per cu. yd. The total cost of slabs in place was thus:

  Item.    Per slab.      Per cu. yd.
Molding       $6.73         $7.27
Erecting       1.66          1.79
              -----         -----
Total         $8.39         $9.06

In studying these cost figures their limitations must be kept in mind.
Because of the character of the available data quantities had in several
cases to be estimated from the working drawings. The cost of lumber for
and of framing column and girder forms is not included, but this is
partly balanced at least by the assumption that each form was erected
complete for each column and girder, which was not the case, as has been
stated. Cost of plant is not included nor is cost of shoring the columns
until girders and struts were placed, nor are several minor
miscellaneous items.

~HOLLOW BLOCK WALL CONSTRUCTION.~--Three general processes of molding
hollow wall blocks of concrete are employed: (1) A dry mixture is
heavily tamped into a mold and the block is immediately released and set
aside for curing; (2) a liquid is poured into molds, where the block
remains until hard: (3) a medium wet mixture is compressed into a mold
by hydraulic presses or other means of securing great pressure. The
molds used may be simple wooden boxes with removable sides or mechanical
molds of comparative complexity. Generally mechanical molds, or concrete
block machines as they are commonly called, will be used. There are a
score or more kinds of block machines all differing in construction and
mode of operation. None of them will be described here, but those
interested may consult "Concrete Block Manufacture" by H. H. Rice or
"Manufacture of Concrete Blocks and Their Use in Building Construction"
by H. H. Rice, Wm. M. Torrance and others.

~Factory Buildings, Grand Rapids, Mich.~--The buildings ranged from one to
four stories high and altogether occupied some 74,000 sq. ft. of ground.
The owners installed a block making plant fully equipped with curing
racks, two Ideal machines, two National concrete mixers, 5 h.p. gasoline
engine, platens, tools and a Chase industrial railway.

The walls were constructed of 24-in. square pilasters of blocks arranged
as shown by Fig. 246, connected by curtain wall belt courses of single
blocks. The blocks were 8×8×16 ins., and after molding the faces were
bush hammered and the edges tooled. The pilasters, consisting of four
blocks laid around an 8×8-in. hollow space, were solidified by pouring
the 8×8-in. space and all but the three outside block cavities with wet
concrete. The interior of the building was of regulation mill
construction, and as the pilasters reached the heights for beam supports
cast iron plates with downward flanges were set in the concrete. These
plates had a cast pin projecting upward to fasten the beam end.

[Illustration: Fig. 246.--Concrete Block Pilaster for a Factory
Building.]

The materials used for the block were Sandusky Portland cement and ¾-in.
bank gravel well balanced from fine to coarse. The blocks were molded
with 1-3 mortar faces, the mortar being waterproofed by a mixture of
Medusa waterproofing compound. All concrete was machine mixed. The men
operating the block machines were paid 1 ct. for each block molded, so
that their pay depended upon the energy with which they worked. The men
handling materials and engaged in handling and curing the blocks were
paid $1.75 per day. The gravel was shoveled from the railway cars onto
the screens and from the screen piles to the mixers. The gang was
organized as follows:

Item.                                                 Per day.
8 men handling materials, at $1.75                      $14.00
5 men operating molds, at 1 ct. per block                15.00
1 man mixing facing mortar, at $1.75                      1.75
2 men loading blocks onto trucks, at $1.75                3.50
2 men unloading blocks from trucks, at $1.75              3.50
3 men sprinkling blocks, at $1.75                         5.25
                                                        ------
Total, 21 men molding and curing blocks                 $43.00

The average daily run was 1,500 blocks, or 300 blocks per machine.

This output was easily maintained after the gang got broken in;
sometimes it ran higher and sometimes lower, but the average was as
given. The men operating the block machines thus earned $3 each per day.
The labor cost of molding and curing per block was thus 2.87 cts. As the
blocks had about 25 per cent. hollow space, each block 8×8×16 ins.
contained 0.45 cu. ft. of concrete; a cubic yard of concrete, therefore,
made 60 blocks, so that the labor cost of making the blocks was 60 ×
2.87 cts. = $1.72 per cubic yard. This cost does not include foreman's
time, materials, interest, depreciation or general expenses. It was
estimated by the owners that the blocks cost them 9 cts. apiece cured,
or about $5.40 per cubic yard of concrete. This 9 cts. evidently
includes materials and labor alone.

Upon removal from the molds the blocks were loaded onto cars, taken to a
large shed and there unloaded onto shelving arranged to hold five rows
of blocks one above the other, two blocks opposite each other on each
shelf. The blocks were left in the shed 24 to 48 hours to get the
preliminary set, then they were loaded on small cars and taken to the
yard, where they were removed from the cars and stacked. They were
sprinkled every day for six days, being kept covered meanwhile with
oiled cotton cloth. The labor costs given above include molding,
sprinkling and handling the blocks up to this point.

To lay the blocks they were again loaded on cars and run to an elevator
in a wooden tower outside the building. The elevator lifted the car to
the floor on which the blocks were to be used, where it was run off onto
a track reaching the full length of the building. The blocks were
unloaded directly behind the masons. Where the walls were high enough
for scaffolding the blocks were unloaded directly onto the first
scaffold and, when necessary, handed up to the scaffolds above. The
masons employed were regular stone masons receiving the regular scale of
wages of $3.50 per day. The number of blocks laid by each mason was 125
per day in building pilasters and 200 per day in building plain wall.
Sometimes 250 blocks per day per man were laid in plain wall work. The
cost per block of laying above was thus 2.8 cts. pilasters and 1.75 cts.
in plain wall. This cost does not include transporting the blocks from
yard or of handling them to the scaffold behind the masons, nor does it
include the cost of materials and labor for mixing and delivering
mortar.

One of the features of this work was the method of transporting the
blocks by cars. A complete system of tracks was provided covering the
block plant and yard, the building sites and the several floors of the
buildings themselves. All blocks and other materials were transported by
cars running on these tracks, both cars and tracks being of the type
made by the Chase Foundry & Manufacturing Co. of Columbus, Ohio.

~Residence, Quogue, N. Y.~--The following record of methods and cost of
constructing a concrete block residence is furnished by Mr. Noyes F.
Palmer: A mixture of sand and pebbles was had on the site; screening was
necessary merely to sort out the odd size stones. A mixture of 1 cement
and 5 sand was really a 1-2-3 mixture, the 2 being the finest grades of
sand and the 3 being various gravel sizes--none too large, none too
small--so that the proportion was 2/5 fine sand and 3/5 gravel.

The concrete was hand mixed, and as the gravel had always just been
excavated it contained moisture and did not have to be wetted. The sand
and gravel were mixed and turned three or four times and spread out
thin, and the cement was carefully spread over them in a uniform layer.
The mass was then turned three or four times until the eye could detect
no difference in color; that is, each grain large enough for the eye to
discern seemed to be coated with cement. After this dry mixing, water
was added in a fine spray--not a deluge from a pail--but only enough to
moisten the mixture. The mass was then turned three or four times. The
mixture was then shoveled into the mold, no special face mixture being
used, so as to about half fill it, and was then tamped by two men, one
standing on each side of the machine. Altogether three layers of
material were so placed and tamped and then a shovelful of sand and
cement mixture was spread over the top to permit an even "strike-off."

As each block was molded it was carried on the working plate and set
down on skids properly spaced to fit the marks on the plate. This is an
important detail and Mr. Palmer comments on it as follows: "The writer
saw inexperienced men careless about it and who would break the backs of
many blocks by not having the skids properly placed. After the blocks
have been at rest for half an hour commence to spray them with a
revolving garden sprinkler or by carefully wetting with a sprinkling pot
on the center of the block only. The blocks should not be allowed to dry
out for at least ten days after removal from the working plate. The
removal from the working plate can be done the morning after molding and
should never be done before even if the block was made in the morning.
In removing the green block from the skids let there be cones of sand
between the rows of blocks and up-end each working plate so as to let
the end of the block come upon the sand cushion. Don't twist and turn
the block, and to remove the working plate pass a stick through the core
holes in both block and plate so that the plate will not fall when
loosened. A slight rap on the center of the plate will loosen it. As
soon as the blocks are up-ended commence the spraying and soak the sand
underneath the block. It may seem unnecessary to dwell on these points
so long, but barrels of cement and barrels of money have been wasted by
neglecting to supply the hardening block with water. Curing is just as
important as molding in making concrete blocks."

The block construction had been detailed by the architect from cellar to
roof, so that it was known beforehand how many blocks of given size were
to be made. The unit of length was 32 ins.; this afforded fractional
parts of 8 ins., 16 ins. and 24 ins., therefore all openings were in
multiples of 8 ins. Odd sizes were made, by inserting "blanks" in the
mold box, to inches or fractions of an inch if desired. This unit
length was less mortar joints, while the unit of height was 9 ins., or
the same as four ordinary bricks with joints. The floor levels were
calculated in multiples of 9 ins., so that the wall could be finished
all around where the beams were to be seated. This beam course was made
of solid blocks; that is, no cores were used in molding them. With the
machine used no change was required to mold these solid blocks except to
remove the cores. The core holes in the working plate were simply
covered with pieces of tin. The shape of the block was the same and the
same materials were used.

The best record in making blocks for this work was 30 blocks, 8×9×32
ins., in one hour, working six men, three mixing and three on the
machine, and using one barrel of cement for 16 blocks. This was a record
run, however, a fair average being 20 blocks per hour, or 200 per ten
hours, which was the day worked. We have then the cost of making blocks
as follows:

 1 foreman, at $2.50                               $ 2.50
 5 helpers, at $2                                   10.00
13 barrels cement, at $2                            26.00
10 cu. yds. sand and gravel, at $1                  10.00
Interest and depreciation on machine                 2.00
                                                   ------
Total for 200 blocks                               $50.50

This gives a cost per block of $50.50 ÷ 200 = 25¼ cts. The displacement
in the wall of each block is 1.75 cu. ft., or the same as 30 bricks.

The cost of laying blocks is the most uncertain item in the whole
industry. Mr. Palmer states that he has known of instances where it cost
only 5 cts. per block and of other instances where, because of the
difficulty of getting help and its inexperience, it cost 15 cts. per
block. In this particular building one mason and three helpers laid 100
blocks per day. The building had no long walls, but it did have many
turns. The cost of laying, then, was as follows:

1 mason, at $4                                      $ 4.00
3 helpers, at $2                                      6.00
                                                     -----
      Total for 100 blocks                          $10.00

This gives a cost for laying of 10 cts. per block. We have, then:

Making 2,000 blocks                                    $505
Laying 2,000 blocks                                     200
                                                       ----
      Total                                            $705

This gives a cost of 35¼ cts. per block for making and laying.

The use of a derrick for laying the blocks proved a considerable item of
economy in this work. This derrick cost $50 and two men could mount and
move it on the floor beams. It had a boom reaching out over the wall and
was operated by a windlass. A plug and feather to fit the center 6-in.
hole in the block was used for hoisting the blocks. By this means blocks
only seven days old were laid without trouble. It may be noted that the
walls were kept drenched with water to make sure that the blocks did not
dry out until they were at least 28 days old. In laying the blocks a
thin lath was used to keep the mortar back about one inch from the face.
This precaution will prevent much labor in cleaning the walls from
mortar slobber.

~Two-Story Building, Albuquerque, N. M.~--The following record of cost of
making 9×10×32-in. hollow blocks in a Palmer machine and of laying 2,000
of them in two-story building walls is given by Mr. J. M. Ackerman. Sand
cost 60 cts. per cu. yd., and cement cost $3 per barrel. Lime cost 30
cts. per bushel. One barrel of cement made 20 blocks, using a 1-4 sand
mixture. In making 2,000 blocks about 100 blocks, or 5 per cent., were
lost by blocks breaking in hauling from yard to building or by cutting
blocks to fit the work. The blocks were molded by piece work for 5 cts
per block, all materials, tools and plant being supplied to the molders.
Three men with one machine made from 100 to 150 blocks per day. The cost
was as follows:

    Item.                                        Per block.
Cement, at $3 per bbl.                                $0.15
Molding, at 5 cts. per block                           0.05
Sand, at 60 cts. per cu. yd.                           0.03
Carting, yard to building                              0.02
Lime and sand for mortar                               0.03
Laying in wall                                         0.10
Loss in making and cutting                             0.01
                                                      -----
      Total                                           $0.39

As each block gave 9 × 32 = 288 sq. ins., or 2 sq. ft., of wall surface,
the cost of the wall per square foot was 19.5 cts. Assuming 40 per cent.
hollow space, each block contained 1 cu. ft. of concrete, which cost 23
cts., or $6.21 per cu. yd., for materials and molding. Blocks in the
wall cost $10.55 Per cu. yd. of concrete.

~General Cost Data.~--The following data are given by Prof. Spencer B.
Newberry. The average weights of three sizes of hollow blocks are as
follows:

  Size, ins.             P. C. Hollow Space.    Weight, lbs.
 8×9×32                      33-1/3            120
10×9×32                      33-1/3            150
12×9×32                      33-1/3            180

Costs of materials are assumed as follows:

Item.                                          Per 100 lbs.
Cement, at $1.50 per bbl.                           $0.40
Hydrated lime, at $5 per ton                        $0.25
Sand, gravel or screenings, at 25 cts. per ton      $0.012

Mixed in batches of 750 lbs., sufficient for six 8-in. or four 12-in.
blocks, the cost of materials per batch and per block will be for a 1-4
mixture as follows:

Item.                    Per Batch.   8-in. Block.   12-in. Block.
150 lbs. cement            $0.60         $0.10         $0.15
600 lbs. sand               0.072         0.012         0.018
                           ------        ------        ------
      Total                $0.672        $0.112        $0.168

In general a factory producing 600 8-in. blocks per day will require 25
men to operate it. At an average wage of $1.80 per day the following is
considered as a fair estimate of cost:

Item.                                Per Day.    Per Block.
Materials for 600 blocks               $ 60        $0.10
25 men, at $1.80                         45         0.075
Repairs                                  10         0.017
Office and miscellaneous                 20         0.034
                                       ----        ------
Total                                  $135        $0.226

This gives for 8×9×32-in. blocks a cost of about $6.78 per cu. yd. of
concrete for materials and molding or of 11.3 cts. per sq. ft. of face.

Mr. L. L. Bingham gives the following as the average cost per square
foot of face for 10-in. wall from data collected from a large number of
block manufacturers operating in Iowa in 1905:

Cement at $1.60 per bbl.                         4.5 cts.
Sand                                             2.0 cts.
Labor at $1.83 per day                           3.8 cts.
                                                ---------
Total cost per square foot                      10.3 cts.

Assuming one-third hollow space, the cost for materials and molding was
$5.05 per cu. yd. of concrete not including interest, depreciation,
repairs, superintendence or general expenses.




CHAPTER XXI.

METHODS AND COST OF AQUEDUCT AND SEWER CONSTRUCTION.


Aqueducts and sewers in concrete are of three kinds: (1) Continuous
monolithic conduits, (2) conduits laid up with molded concrete blocks,
and (3) conduits made up of sections of molded pipe. Block conduits and
conduits of molded pipe are rare in America compared with monolithic
construction; examples of each are, however, given in succeeding
sections, where forms, methods of molding, etc., are described. The
following discussion refers to monolithic construction alone.

~FORMS AND CENTERS.~--Forms and centers for conduit work have to meet
several requirements. They have to be rigid enough not only to withstand
the actual loads coming on them, but to keep from being warped by the
alternate wetting and drying to which they are subjected. They have also
to be constructed to give a smooth surface to the conduit. To be
economical, they have to be capable of being taken down, moved ahead and
re-erected quickly and easily. The carpenter costs run high in
constructing conduit forms, so that each form has to be made the most of
by repeated use.

Three different constructions of traveling forms are described in the
succeeding sections. For small work, such forms appear to offer certain
advantages, but for conduits of considerable size their convenience and
economy are uncertain. The experience with the large traveling form
employed on the Salt River irrigation works in Arizona was, when all is
said, rather discouraging. The authors believe that for work of any size
where the concrete must be supported for 24 hours or more, forms of
sectional construction will prove cheaper and more expeditious than any
traveling form so far devised.

No class of concrete work, perhaps, offer so good an opportunity for the
use of metal forms as does conduit work. The smooth surface left by
metal forms is particularly advantageous, and there is a material
reduction in weight and a large increase in durability due, both to the
lack of wear and to freedom from warping. Steel forms of the Blaw type
shown by Fig. 247, have been used for conduits up to 25 ft. in diameter.
The form illustrated, Fig. 247, was for a 12-ft. 3-in. sewer; in this
case a roof form alone was used, but full circular and egg-shape forms
are made. The Blaw collapsible Steel Centering Co., of Pittsburg, Pa.,
make and lease steel forms of this type.

[Illustration: Fig. 247.--Blaw Collapsible Steel Centering for Conduit
Construction.]

Sectional wooden forms for conduits of large diameters are shown by the
drawings in several of the succeeding sections. Figures 248 and 249 show
such forms for small diameters. The form shown by Fig. 248 is novel in
the respect that after being assembled a square timber was passed
through it lengthwise, occupying the holes B and having its ends
projecting and rounded to form gudgeons. The form was mounted with
these gudgeons resting on horses, so that it could be rotated and thus
wound with a narrow strip of thin steel plate. Thus sheathed, the form
was lowered into the trench and the concrete was placed around it. When
the arch had been turned, the wedges A were driven in until the ribs
C dropped into the slots a and clear of the steel shell; the arch form
was then pulled out and finally the invert form, leaving the steel shell
in place to hold the concrete until hard. The strip of steel was then
removed by pulling on one end until it unwound like cord from the inside
of a ball of twine. Steel strips 6 ins. wide and 1/24 in. thick were
used successfully in constructing a 5-ft. egg-shaped sewer in
Washington, D. C. The forms were made in sections 16 ft. long, and were
taken out as soon as the concrete had been placed.

[Illustration: Fig. 248.--Sectional Steel Wrapped Wooden Form for
Conduit Construction.]

[Illustration: Fig. 249.--Invert Form for Conduit Construction.]

The form shown by Fig. 249, is an invert form, used in constructing the
sewer shown by Fig. 249, built at Medford, Mass., in 1902, by day labor.
The concrete was 1-3-6 gravel. The forms for the invert were made
collapsible and in 10-ft. lengths. The two halves were held together by
iron clamps and hook rods. The morning following the placing of the
concrete the hook rods were removed and turnbuckle hooks were put in
their places, so that by tightening the turnbuckle the forms were
carefully separated from the concrete. The concrete was then allowed to
stand 24 hours, when the arch centers were set in place. These centers
were made of 7/8×1½-in. lagging on 2-in. plank ribs 2 ft. apart, and
stringers on each side. Wooden wedges on the forward end of each section
supported the rear end of the adjoining section. The forward end of each
section was supported by a screw jack placed under a rib 2 ft. from the
front end. To remove the centers, the rear end of a small truck was
pushed under the section about 18 ins.; an adjustable roller was
fastened by a thumb screw to the forward rib of the center; the screw
jack was lowered allowing the roller to drop on a run board on top of
the truck; the truck was then pulled back by a tail rope until the
adjustable roller ran off the end of the truck; whereupon the truck was
pulled forward drawing the center off the supporting wedges of the rear
section. Each lineal foot of sewer required 1¼ cu. yds. of excavation
which cost 74.2 cts. per foot, and 1 cu. ft. of brick arch which cost
$12.07 per cu. yd., or 44.2 cts. per lineal foot of sewer. The invert
required 4 cu. ft. of concrete per foot, which cost as follows:

  Item.                             Per cu. yd.
Portland cement at $2.15 per bbl.     $2.292
Labor mixing and placing               3.017
Cost of forms                          0.187
Labor screening gravel                 0.471
Carting                                0.592
Miscellaneous                          0.146
                                      ------
  Total                               $6.705

The cost of the invert was thus $1.002 per lin. ft. of sewer.

Collapsible metal forms for manholes and catch basins are made by
several firms which make block and pipe molds. A cylindrical wooden form
construction is shown by Fig. 250. The outside form consists of three
segments of a cylinder made of 2-in. lagging bolted to hoops. Bent lugs
on the ends of the hoops, were provided with open top slots and were
bolted together through 1×3/8-in. bars which extended the full length of
the form between lugs. The assembled form was collapsed by pulling up on
the bars, thus lifting the bolts out of the slots. The inner mold is
also made in three sections with strap hinges at two of the joints and
at the third joint a wedge-shaped stave. The other details are shown by
the drawing. To mold the top of the basin two cone-shaped forms are
used, an outer form made in one piece and an inner form made in
sections. Some 26 catch basins were built in Keney Park, Hartford,
Conn., by Mr. H. G. Clark, at a cost of $7 apiece for concrete in place,
and there was closely 1 cu. yd. of concrete in each.

[Illustration: Fig. 250.--Form for Circular Catch Basin or Manhole.]

~CONCRETING.~--Except for pipes of small diameter, the concreting is done
in sections, each section being a day's work. Continuity of construction
has not proved successful, except for pipes of moderate size, in the few
cases where it has been tried. Examples of continuous construction
methods are given in succeeding sections. Methods of molding and laying
cast concrete pipe are also best shown by the specific examples given
further on. In concreting large diameters, the work may be done by
molding successive full barrel sections, or by molding first the invert
and then the roof arch, each in sections. The engineer's specifications
generally stipulate which plan is to be followed. Construction joints
between sections are molded by bulkhead forms framed to produce the type
of joint designed by the engineer; the most common type is the tongue
and groove joint.

[Illustration: Fig. 251.--Cross-Section of Pinto Creek Irrigation
Conduit.]

For small diameters built with traveling forms, a comparatively dry
concrete is essential, but when the centers are left in place until the
concrete has set, a wet mixture is preferable, as it is more easily
placed and worked around the reinforcement in the thin shells. Mixers
are commonly specified even for small work, because of their generally
more uniform and homogeneous product. Portable mixers hauled along the
bank and discharging into the forms through chutes, furnish a cheap and
rapid arrangement where the section being built has a considerable
yardage. The examples given in succeeding sections present various
methods of mixing and placing concrete in conduit work.

[Illustration: Fig. 252.--Traveling Form for Pinto Creek Conduit.]

~REINFORCED CONDUIT, SALT RIVER IRRIGATION WORKS, ARIZONA.~--The pipe had
the cross-section shown by Fig. 251, and formed a syphon carrying water
under the bed of a creek. The concrete was a 1-2½-4 fine gravel mixture,
mixed by hand on boards 150 ft. apart along the line. The shell was
reinforced as shown.

The forms consisted of an outside form constructed as shown by Fig. 251,
by inserting 2½-in.×5½ ft. lagging strips in the metal ribs. The inside
form was designed to permit continuous work by moving the form ahead as
the concreting progressed. It consisted as shown by Fig. 252, of an
invert form on which an arch form was carried on rollers. The invert
form was pulled along by cable from a horsepower whim set ahead, being
steered, aligned and kept to grade by being slid on a light wooden
track. It had the form of a long half cylinder, with its forward end
beveled off to form a scoop-like snout. The arch center consisted of
semi-circular rings 2 ft. long, set one at a time as the work required.
Each ring, when set, was flange-bolted to the one behind, and each was
hinged at three points on the circumference to make it collapsible. In
operation, the invert form was intended to be pulled ahead and the arch
rings to be placed one after another in practically a continuous
process. So that the arch rings might continue supported after the
invert form was drawn out from under them, invert plates similar to the
arch plates were inserted one after another in place of the shell of the
invert form. The plan provided very nicely for continuous work, but
continuous work was found impracticable for all but about 2,500 ft. of
the 6,000 ft. of conduit built. The reason for this seems to have been
at least in a great measure, the slow setting cement made at the cement
works established by the Government, at Roosevelt. In building the first
300 ft. of conduit, a commercial cement was used and a progress of 120
lin. ft. of pipe per 24 hours was easily made. This work was done in
June. Later, but still in warm weather, using the Government cement and
70 ft. of arch plates, not more than 70 ft. of pipe could be completed
in 24 hours; if the plates were taken down sooner, patches of concrete
fell out or peeled off with them. As the weather grew colder, this
difficulty increased, until finally, the idea of continuous work was
abandoned and for some 3,500 ft. of conduit only one 8-hour shift per
day was worked. In December and January the plates had to remain in
place three days, so that the progress was only 24 ft. per day; in warm
weather this rate was increased to 40 ft. per day.

Costs were kept on two sections of one of the lines and the figures
shown in the accompanying table were obtained.

A gang consisted of a foreman at $175 per month, a sub-foreman at $3.50
per day, and the following laborers at $2.50 per day: one bending the
reinforcement rings; two placing the reinforcement; four taking down,
moving and erecting the stationary plates; four placing the concrete and
outside lagging; two wheeling concrete; six mixing concrete; one
wheeling sand and gravel; one watering the finished pipe; four laying
track for the steering apparatus, moving the superstructure and hangers,
mixing boards, runways, etc.; one pointing and finishing inside the
pipe; and one on the whim and doing miscellaneous work. The labor was
principally Mexican, and only fairly efficient.

It is important to note that the costs given in the table are labor
costs only of mixing and placing concrete and moving forms; they do not
include engineering, first cost of forms, concrete materials,
reinforcement or grading.

                                      May, '06.   July, '06.
                              Wages     714         1,009      Cost     Per
                               Per    Lin. Ft.     Lin. Ft.    Per      Cu.
                               Day.    Cost.        Cost.    Lin. Ft.   Yd.
       { Laying track for
       {  steering alligator  $ 5.00   $ 71.48     $ 43.98   $0.0670   $0.16
 4 men { Moving and erecting
       {  superstructure        5.00    299.94      358.44    0.3821    0.93
 4 men Moving plates           10.00    202.50      253.44    0.2646    0.65
Repairs to alligator                     58.50        2.50    0.0354    0.08
 1 man Bending rings            2.50     32.87       59.87    0.0538    0.13
 2 men Placing reinforcement    5.00    126.94      138.13    0.1538    0.38
12 men Mixing and placing
         concrete              30.00    709.68      949.74    0.9631    2.34
 1 man Watering finished pipe.  2.50     45.00       78.27    0.0716    0.17
 1 man Painting and
   brush-coating inside         2.50     96.50      117.37    0.1241    0.31
       Blacksmith's work                 30.00       25.00    0.0319    0.08
 1 man Whim                     2.50     23.87       28.75    0.0306    0.07
 1 man Screening and hauling
         sand and gravel        2.50    183.13      300.00    0.2804    0.68
                                     ---------   ---------   -------   -----
  Total                              $1,880.41   $2,335.49   $2.4584   $5.98

~CONDUITS, TORRESDALE FILTERS, PHILADELPHIA, PA.~--At the Torresdale plant
of Philadelphia filtration system the clear water conduits are
reinforced concrete. The following description is composed from
information furnished the authors in 1904 by the Bureau of Filtration,
Mr. John W. Hill, then chief engineer. The lengths of the several
conduits are as follows: 576 ft. of 7½-ft., 782 ft. of 8-ft., 1,050 ft.
of 9-ft., and 1,430 ft. of 10-ft. horseshoe conduit. All sizes of
conduit have the same cross-sectional form--the cross-section of the
9-ft. conduit is shown by Fig. 253, and all are reinforced by expanded
metal arranged as indicated. The concrete is a 1-3-5, ¾-in. stone
mixture. The conduits were first designed with circular sections, but
before construction had been begun on these plans, experience had been
obtained in building a circular sewer that made a change to the
horseshoe section appear desirable. In the circular sewer work, great
difficulty had been found in properly placing and ramming the concrete
in the lower quarters of the circular section.

[Illustration: Fig. 253.--Section of 9-ft. Conduit, Philadelphia Filter
Plant.]

_Forms._--The forms used for the several sizes of conduit were all of
the same general type, but improvements in detail were made as
successive sizes were built. The last form to be designed was that for
the 9-ft. section and this was the best one; it is shown by Fig. 254.
The forms were built in sections from 12 ft. to 13½ ft. long. They were
covered with No. 27 galvanized sheet iron, and this covering was found
of advantage both in giving a smooth finish and in prolonging the life
of the centers. The important feature is the construction in sections
which could be set up and broken down by simply inserting and removing
the connecting bolts. Three sets of forms were made for each size of
conduit.

[Illustration: Fig. 254.--Form for 9-ft. Conduit Philadelphia Filter
Plant.]

_Procedure of Work._--The first operation in building a section of
conduit was to set to exact line and grade and the length of the form in
advance of the finished work the bulkhead shown by Fig. 255. In this
space the invert concrete was deposited and formed to a plane 1 in.
below the finished invert bottom. The two bottom sections of the form
were then assembled and located by bolting one end to the last preceding
form and inserting the other end into the bulkhead. About two tons of
pig iron were then placed on the invert form to keep it from floating
while the liquid granolithic mixture was being poured into the 1-in.
space between the form and the invert concrete. In building up the sides
a facing form was used for placing the granolithic finish. This
consisted of "boards" of sheet steel ribbed transversely on one side
with ¾-in. pipe and on the other side with 1½-in. pipe. Two boards were
used on each haunch, slightly lapping in the center, as follows: The
board was placed with the small ribs against the form and the larger
ribs kept the expanded metal just 3 ins. from the face of the form. A
6-in. depth of concrete was placed between the metal board and the
outside form or planks, then 6 ins. of granolithic was poured into the
1-in. space between the center and the board and finally the board was
raised 6 ins. and the concrete and granolithic mixture tamped together.
With the board in its new position, another layer of concrete and
granolithic was placed. Toward the crown the granolithic mixture was
made stiff and simply plastered onto the mold. The expanded metal was
cut into sheets corresponding to the length of the sides of the form and
lapped 6 ins. in all directions; the bulkhead having a slot as shown to
permit the metal to project 6 ins. from the face of the concrete in
order to tie two sections together and also having a rib which formed a
mortise in the face of the shell of concrete to key it to the succeeding
section.

[Illustration: Fig. 255.--Bulkhead Form for Conduits, Philadelphia
Filter Plant.]

All the conduits were built in sections from 12 ft. to 13½ ft. long, and
there was very little, if any, difference in the labor required to build
a section, in from eight to ten hours, of any of the three sizes. One
foreman and 18 men on the top of the trench mixed and handled the
concrete and granolithic mortar while one foreman, one carpenter and
seven men in the trench set the forms and placed and rammed the concrete
for one section in generally eight hours. About one-third of the
concrete for the whole work was mixed in a portable cubical mixer of ½
cu. yd. capacity, and the remainder was mixed by hand. Owing to the
relatively small amount of concrete used per day, about 20 cu. yds., it
was found that there was practically no difference in the cost of
machine mixing and of hand mixing. The 9-ft. conduit as an average of
the three sizes, contained 20 cu. yds. of concrete, 1,200 sq. ft. of
expanded and required 125 bags of cement for a section 13½ ft. long. The
cost of the work excluding excavation and profit, but including forms,
metal, concrete materials and labor, was about $10.50 per cu. yd.

~CONDUIT, JERSEY CITY WATER SUPPLY.~--In constructing the 8½-ft.
reinforced concrete conduit for the Jersey City water supply, use was
made of forms without bottoms. Each form was made of segmental sections
12½ ft. long of wood covered with sheet steel. They were set end to end
in the trench, resting on 6-in. concrete cubes which were finally
permanently embedded in the invert concrete. In each form there was a
scuttle about 2 ft. square at the crown, and the bottom was open between
the curves of the invert haunches. The form being set and greased and
the reinforcement placed, the concrete was deposited on the outside and
forced by means of tamping bars down the curve of the invert haunches
until it filled the whole space between the form and the earth and
appeared at the edges of the bottom opening in the form. Concrete was
then thrown through the scuttle and the invert screeded into shape. The
concreting of the sides and crown of the arch was then completed, using
outside forms except for about 5 ft. of the crown, the scuttle, of
course, being closed by a fitted cover. The centers were left in place
about 48 hours. The concrete was a 1 cement 7 sand and run of the
crusher 2-in. broken stone mixture, and was made so wet that it would
flow down an incline of 1 on 8. The mixing was done in portable Ransome
mixers, set on the trench bank alongside the work and discharging by
chute into dished shoveling boxes provided with legs to set on the
erected forms. Coal scoops were used in shoveling from the box into the
forms and were found superior to shovels in keeping the relative
proportions of water and solids constant.

~TWIN TUBE WATER CONDUIT AT NEWARK, N. J.~--In constructing the Cedar
Grove Reservoir, at Newark, N. J., two conduits side by side were built
across the bottom from gate house to tunnel outlet. A section of one of
the conduits showing the form construction and the arrangement of the
reinforcement is given by Fig. 256. The concrete was a 1-2-5 1½-in.
stone mixture and the reinforcement was No. 10 3-in. mesh expanded
metal. The method and cost of construction are given as follows, by Mr.
G. C. Woollard, the engineer for the contractors.

[Illustration: Fig. 256.--Conduit for Cedar Grove Reservoir, Newark. N.
J.]

"The particular thing that was insisted upon by both Mr. M. R. Sherrerd,
the chief engineer of the Newark Water Department and Mr. Carlton E.
Davis, the resident engineer at Cedar Grove Reservoir, in connection
with these conduits, was that they be built without sections in their
circumference, that the whole of the circumference of any one section of
the length should be constructed at one time. They were perfectly
willing to allow us to build the conduit in any length section we
desired, so long as we left an expansion joint occasionally which did
not leak.

"The good construction of these conduits was demonstrated later, when
the section stood 40 lbs. pressure to the square inch, and, in addition,
I may say that these conduits have not leaked at all since their
construction. This shows the wisdom of building the conduit all round in
one piece, that is, in placing the concrete over the centers all at one
time, instead of building a portion of it, and then completing that
portion later, after the lower portion had had an opportunity to set.

"The centers which I designed on this work were very simple and
inexpensive, as will be gathered from the cost of the work, when I state
that this conduit, which measured only 0.8 cu. yd. of concrete to the
lineal foot of single conduit, cost only $6.14 per cu. yd., built with
Atlas cement, including all labor and forms and material, and expanded
metal. The forms were built in 16 ft. lengths, each 16 ft. length having
five of the segmental ribbed centers such as are shown in Fig. 256,
viz., one center at each end and three intermediate centers in the
length of 16 ft. These segments were made by a mill in Newark and cost
90 cts. apiece, not including the bolts. We placed the lagging on these
forms at the reservoir, and it was made of ordinary 2×4 material,
surfaced on both sides, with the edges beveled to the radius of the
circle. These pieces of 2×4 were nailed with two 10d. nails to each
segment. The segments were held together by four ½-in. bolts, which
passed through the center, and 1½-in. wooden tie block. There was no
bottom segment to the circle. This was left open, and the whole form
held apart by a piece, B, of 3×2 spruce, with a bolt at each end
bolted to the lower segment on each side.

"The outside forms consisted of four steel angles to each 16 ft. of the
conduit, one on each end, and two, back to back, in the middle of each
16 ft. length. These angles were 2×3, with the 2-in. side on the
conduit, and the 3-in. side of the angle had small lugs bolted on it at
intervals, to receive the 2×12 plank, which was slipped down on the
outside of the conduit, as it was raised in height. The angles were held
from kicking out at the bottom by stakes driven into the ground, and
held together at the top by a 2½-in. tie-rod.

"The conduit was 8 ins. thick, save at the bottom, where it was 12 ins.
The reason for the 12 ins. at the bottom was that the forms had to have
a firm foundation to rest on, in order to put all the weight required by
the conduit on them in one day or at one time, without settling. We
therefore excavated the conduit to grade the entire length, and
deposited a 4-in. layer of concrete to level and grade over the entire
length of the conduit line. This gave us a good, firm foundation, true
and accurate to work from, and this is the secret of the good work which
was done on these conduits. If you examine them, you will say that they
are one of the neatest jobs of concrete in this line that has been
built, especially with regard to the inside, which is true, level and
absolutely smooth. [The authors can confirm this statement.] When the
conduit is filled with water, it falls off with absolutely no point
where water stands in the conduit, owing to its being out or the proper
amount of concrete not being deposited.

"The centers were placed in their entirety on a new length of conduit to
be built, resting upon four piles of brick, two at each end as shown.
The first concrete was placed in the forms at the point marked X and
the next concrete was dropped in through a trap door cut in the roof of
the conduit form at the point marked Y. This material was dropped in
to form the invert, and this portion was shaped by hand with trowels and
screeded to the exact radius of the conduit. The concrete was then
placed continuously up the sides, and boards were dropped in the angles
which I have mentioned, and which served as outside form holders till
the limit was reached at the top, where it was impossible to get the
concrete in under the planking and thoroughly tamped. At this point the
top was formed by hand and with screeds.

"Each 16-ft. length of this conduit was made with opposite ends male and
female respectively, that is, we had a small form which allowed the
concrete to step down at one end to 3 ins. in thickness for 8 ins. back
from the end of the section, and on the other end of the section it
allowed it to step down to 3 ins. in thickness in exactly the opposite
way, making a scarf joint. This was not done at every 16 ft. length,
unless only 16 ft. were placed in one day. We usually placed 48 ft. a
day at one end of the conduit with one gang of men. This was allowed to
set 24 hours, and, whatever length of conduit was undertaken in a day,
was absolutely completed, rain or shine, and the gang next day resumed
operations at the other end of the conduit on another 48 ft. length.
This was completed, no matter what the weather conditions were, and,
towards the close of this day the forms placed on the preceding day were
being drawn and moved ahead.

"The method used in moving these forms ahead for another day's work is
probably one of the secrets of the low cost of this work, and it is one
which we have never seen employed before. The bolt at A, Fig. 256, was
taken out, and the tie brace B thrown up. We had hooks at the points
C. A turnbuckle was thrown in, catching these hooks, and given several
sharp turns, causing the entire form to spring downward and inwards,
which gave it just enough clearance to be carried forward, without doing
any more striking of forms than pulling the bolt at A. This method of
pulling the forms worked absolutely satisfactorily, and never gave any
trouble, and we were able to move the forms very late in the day and get
them all set for next day's work, giving all the concrete practically 24
hours' set, as we always started concreting in the morning at the
furthest end of the form set up and at the greatest distance from the
old concrete possible in the 48 ft. length, as the furthest form had, of
course, to be moved first, it being impossible to pass one form through
the other.

"Six 16-ft. sections of these forms were built, and three were used each
day on each end, as shown by the diagram MN, Fig. 256, which gives the
day for the month for the completion of each of seven 48-ft. sections.

"A gang of men simply shifted on alternate days from end to end of the
conduit, although several sections were in progress at one time; and of
course, finally, when a junction was made between any division, say of
1,000 ft. to another 1,000 ft., one small form was left in at this
junction inside of the conduit, and had to be taken down and taken out
the entire length of the conduit.

"The centers for a 16-ft. length of this conduit cost complete for labor
and material, $18.30, but they were used over and over again; and, after
this conduit was completed, they were taken away for use at other
points, so that the cost is hardly appreciable, and the only charge to
centers that we made after the first cost of building the centers, was
on account of moving them daily. Part of this conduit was built double
(two 6-ft. conduits) and part single, the only difference being that,
where the double conduit was built, two forms were placed side by side,
and not so much was undertaken in one day.

"These conduits, when completed and dried out, rung exactly like a
60-in. cast-iron pipe, when any one walked through them or stamped on
the bottom."

Mr. Woollard gives the following analysis of the cost per cubic yard of
the concrete-steel conduit above described:

                                   Per cu. yd.
1.3 bbl. cement                          $1.43
10 cu. ft. sand                           0.35
25 cu. ft. stone                          1.10
26 sq. ft. expanded metal, at 3 cts.      0.78
Loading and hauling materials 2,000 ft.
  to the mixing board (team at $4.50)     0.50
Labor mixing, placing, and ramming        1.38
Labor moving forms                        0.60
                                         -----
Total                                    $6.14

Wages were 17½ cts. per hr. for laborers and 50 cts. per hr. for
foremen. The concrete was 1-2-5, a barrel being assumed to be 3.8 cu.
ft. The concrete was mixed by hand on platforms alongside the conduit.
The cost of placing and ramming was high, on account of the expanded
metal, the small space in which to tamp, and to the screeding cost. When
forms were moved they were scraped and brushed with soft soap before
being used again.

From Mr. Morris R. Sherrerd, Engineer and Superintendent, Department of
Water, Newark, N. J., we have received the following data which differ
slightly from those given by Mr. Woollard. The differences may be
explained by the fact that the cost records were made at different
times. Mr. Sherrerd states (Sept. 26, 1904,) that each batch contains 4
cu. ft. of cement, 8 cu. ft. of sand, and 20 cu. ft. of stone, making 22
cu. ft. of concrete in place. One bag of cement is assumed to hold 1
cu. ft. He adds that a 10-hour day's work for a gang is 63 lin. ft. of
single 6-ft. conduit containing 47.4 cu. yds. of concrete and 1,260 sq.
ft. of expanded metal. This is equivalent to ¾ cu. yd. of concrete per
lin. ft. The total cost of material for one complete set of forms 64 ft.
long was $160; and there were 7 of these sets required to keep two gangs
of men busy, each gang building 63 lin. ft. of conduit a day. Since the
total length of the conduit was 3,850 ft., the first cost of the
material in the forms was 18 cts. per lin. ft.

Cost of Labor on 6-ft. Conduit:

                                       Per day.     Per cu. yd.
1 foreman on concrete                    $ 3.35        $0.07
1 water boy                                0.75         0.01
11 men mixing at $1.75                    19.25         0.39
5 men mixing at $1.50                      7.50         0.16
4 men loading stone at $1.40               5.60         0.12
4 men wheeling stone at $1.40              5.60         0.12
2 men loading sand at $1.40                2.80         0.06
2 men wheeling sand at $1.40               2.80         0.06
1 man placing concrete at $1.75            1.75         0.04
6 men placing concrete at $1.50            9.00         0.19
2 men supplying water at $1.50             3.00         0.06
1 man placing expanded metal at $2.        2.00         0.04
1 man placing expanded metal at $1.50      1.50         0.03
                                         ------        -----
  Total labor on concrete                $64.90        $1.35

Cost of Labor Moving Forms:

                                    Per day.     Per cu. yd.
4 carpenters placing forms            $13.00        $0.27
2 helpers placing forms                 4.00         0.08
1 carpenter putting up boards
  for outside forms                     2.75         0.06
1 helper putting up boards
  for outside forms                     2.25         0.05
2 helpers putting up boards
  for outside forms                     3.50         0.07
1 team hauling timber                   4.50         0.09
1 helper hauling lumber                 1.75         0.04
                                      ------        -----
  Total labor moving                  $31.75        $0.66

It will be noted that it required two men to bend and place the 700
lbs., or 1,260 sq. ft., of expanded metal required for 63 lin. ft. of
conduit per day, which is equivalent to ½c per lb., or 3 cts. per sq.
ft., for the labor of shaping, placing and fastening the metal.

~CIRCULAR SEWER, SOUTH BEND, INDIANA.~--In building 2,464 ft. of 66-in.
circular reinforced concrete sewer at South Bend, Ind., in 1906, the
method of construction illustrated in Figs. 257, 258 and 259 was
employed. The sewer has a 9-in. shell buttressed on the sides and is
reinforced every 12 ins. by a 3/16×1-in. peripheral bar in the sides and
roof and 3 ins. in from the soffit. Each bar is composed of three
pieces, two side pieces from 15 ins. below to 6 ins. above springing
lines and a connecting roof bar attached to the side bars by cotter
pins. Two grades of concrete were used, a 1-3-6 bank gravel concrete for
the invert and a 1-2-4 bank gravel concrete for the arch. The invert was
given a ½-in. plaster coat of 1-1 mortar as high as the springing lines.

[Illustration: Fig. 257.--Form for South Bend Sewer (First Stage).]

[Illustration: Fig. 258.--Form for South Bend Sewer (Second Stage).]

[Illustration: Fig. 259.--Form for South Bend Sewer (Third Stage).]

Forms and Concreting.--In constructing the sewer the trench was
excavated so as to give a clearance of 1 ft. on each side and was
sheeted as shown by Fig. 257. The sewer was built in 12 ft. sections as
follows: The bottom of the trench was shaped as nearly as possible to
the grade and shape of the base of the sewer. Four braces to each 12 ft.
section were then nailed across the trench between the lowest rangers on
the trench sheeting. A partial form consisting of a vertical row of
lagging was set on each of the outside lines of the sewer barrel as
shown by Fig. 257. Each section of this lagging was held by stakes
driven into the trench bottom and nailed at their tops to the cross
braces as shown by Fig. 258. A template for the invert was then
suspended from the cross braces by pieces nailed to the four ribs of the
template and to the cross braces as shown by Fig. 257. The concrete was
now placed and carried to the top of the template, which was then
removed. The side pieces of the reinforcing bars were then set and
fastened as shown by Fig. 258. The side forms extending up to the
springing lines were then placed. They were held in position by braces
nailed to their ribs at the tops and by other braces fitting into
notches in the ends of their ribs at the bottom. The concrete was then
carried up to the springing lines, the arch centers in two pieces were
placed; the arch bar of the reinforcement was placed and the extrados
forms erected up to the 45° lines, all as shown by Fig. 259. The placing
of the arch concrete completed the sewer barrel. The outside forms and
bracing were removed about 24 hours after the completion of the arch and
back filling the trench was begun immediately, but the inside forms were
left in place for two weeks; they were then removed by the simple
process of knocking out the notched braces. By building several lengths
of invert first and following in succession by the side wall
construction and then by the arch construction, the form erection and
the concreting proceeded without interruption by each other. It was also
found that, by making bends in the form of polygons with 10 ft. sides
instead of in the form of curves, there was a material saving in
expensive form work. To overcome the friction of the angles in such
bends an additional fall was provided at these places. All concrete was
made in a Smith mixer mounted on trucks so that it could be moved along
the bank of the trench and discharging into a trough leading to the
work.

_Labor Force and Cost._--With a gang of 12 men from 24 to 36 ft. of
sewer was built per 10-hour day, working only part of the time on actual
concreting. The disposition of the force mixing and laying concrete and
the wages were as follows:

  Item.                                Per day.
Six wheelers, at 18.5 cts. per hour      $11.10
One mixer, at 22.5 cts. per hour           2.25
One dumper, at 18.5 cts. per hour          1.85
Four placers, at 22.5 cts. per hour        9.00
                                         ------
  Total                                  $24.20

There were 0.594 cu. yd. of concrete per lineal foot of sewer and its
cost is given as follows:

Item.                                     Per cu. yd.
Cost of gravel                                $0.774
Cost of sand                                   0.36
Cost of cement                                 1.50
Cost of steel reinforcement                    0.84
Cost of labor, mixing and placing concrete     1.094
Cost of moving forms, templates, etc.          0.757
Cost of forms, templates, etc.                 0.589
Cost of finishing, plastering, etc.            0.639
Cost of tools and general expenses             0.841
                                              ------
Total                                         $7.394

~SEWER INVERT, HAVERHILL, MASS.~--In constructing sewers with concrete
inverts at Haverhill, Mass., in 1905, use was made of the traveling form
or mold shown by Fig. 260. The form consists of an inner and an outer
shell, the annular space between which forms the mold; in operation the
annular space is filled with concrete, then the outer shell is pulled
ahead from underneath, leaving the inner shell in place. A second inner
shell is then adjusted to the outer shell in its new position, the
annular mold is concreted and the outer shell again pulled ahead.
Continued repetition of the operations described completes the invert.
The merit of the device lies in the fact that the inner shell is not
moved until the concrete has attained some degree of rigidity; when, in
such devices, the inner mold is slid ahead on the green concrete it is
likely so to "drag" forward the material that a rough and pitted surface
results.

_Mold Construction._--Referring to the drawings of Fig. 260, A is the
outer mold of sheet steel bent to the required shape of the outer
surface of the conduit to be constructed. A rib, or angle, B, is
riveted to the inside of the mold at its front end and a diaphragm C
of plank is securely fastened to the rear side of the rib. The opposite
or rear end of the mold is open. Angles D forming tracks are riveted
inside the mold a short distance below the edges and reaching their full
length. The inner mold comprises a steel shell E curved to the form of
the inside of the conduit; inside this steel shell is a reinforcing
lagging, and at each end there is a wooden diaphragm F. Passing
through both end diaphragms and having its ends flush with the end
planes of the mold is a timber G. Rearward projecting lips e are
secured to the lagging at the rear end of the mold and on each side of
the timber G. The diaphragms F have each two arms f which project
horizontally beyond the surface of the inner mold and engage the tracks
D; locking dogs H are pivoted to the arms f so as to hook under
the track angles D and hold the inner form from rising. Setting on the
inner mold is an inverted V-shaped deflector I; its edges are flush
with the sides of the mold and its purpose is to facilitate the placing
of the concrete. There is also a movable diaphragm K, fitting loosely
inside the outer mold A and bearing against the end of the inner mold
E. The length of the inner mold E is about one-half that of the
outer mold A; as a rule several inner molds are provided with one
outer mold.

[Illustration: Fig. 260.--Traveling Invert Form for Sewer Construction.]

_Mode of Operation._--In using the device described the outer mold A
is first placed in the trench with its rear end at the end of the
trench. An inner mold E is then suspended on the tracks of the outer
mold and locked therein by the dogs H, with its rear end flush with
the rear end of the outer mold. The partition K is then placed in
position against the forward end of the inner mold and a jack J of any
suitable form is interposed between diaphragms K and C, the jack
being extended sufficiently to press diaphragm K firmly against the
front end of the inner mold. The deflector I is next placed in
position on the inner mold and the concrete is forced down with an iron
rammer between the two molds, so as to fill completely the annular
space. The deflector aids in directing the concrete into this space, as
will be obvious. After the mold has been filled and the concrete
compacted as much as possible, the jack is operated to separate the
diaphragms K and C, and as the partition K is pressed against one
end of the mass of concrete which has been laid, the opposite end of
which abuts against the end of the trench, it follows that any backward
movement of the diaphragm K will compress the concrete. This movement
will be practically inappreciable in distance, but enough to compact
thoroughly the concrete and fill any voids. The action of the jack will
also push forward the diaphragm C and the outer mold A, the latter
being withdrawn from beneath the inner mold and the newly laid concrete,
the tracks D of the outer mold being drawn from beneath the arms f
of the inner mold, leaving the latter behind resting on the freshly laid
concrete. Further compression of the concrete after it has been left by
the outer mold will fill the spaces between the inner mold and the
surface of the trench. The outer mold is moved forward in this manner a
distance equal to the length of the inner mold, and then the diaphragm
K is drawn forward and another inner mold is lowered into the outer
mold exactly as was the first one. The jack is then placed, the concrete
deposited and the outer mold again advanced exactly as before. As the
outer mold advances, the inner molds become disengaged one after another
and are set ahead; in practice, enough inner molds are provided to
enable the concrete to harden sufficiently to keep its position when it
becomes necessary to take up successively the rearmost molds and place
them ahead.

_Haverhill Sewer Work._--The work at Haverhill, Mass., previously
mentioned in which the form just described was used, was a 24-in.
circular sewer with 6-in. walls. The outer form was 36 ins. in diameter
and 6 ft. 2 ins. long; the inner form was 24 ins. in diameter and 3 ft.
long. Angle B was 3 ins. and the track angles D were 1½ ins.; diaphragm
K was made of two thicknesses of 3-in. plank and diaphragm C of one
thickness of 3-in. plank, the other diaphragms were of 2-in. plank. The
shells of the molds were of ¼-in. steel plate; the jack was an ordinary
screw jack. Eight inner molds were used.

The form used at Haverhill was built by the city carpenter, the metal
portions being made in a boiler shop. Its cost was not ascertained, but
was, it is thought, about $75. The concrete used was a 1-3-5 stone
mixture, with cement costing $2 per barrel, sand $1.50 per load of 36
cu. ft., and stone $2.50 per load of 36 cu. ft. The men were paid 25
cts. per hour. Records kept on 265 ft. of invert, or, theoretically,
19.3 cu. yds. of concrete, gave the following figures:

                                      Per       Per
                                    lin. ft.  cu. yd.
Labor, setting and moving
  forms, 42 hours, at 25 cts.          $0.05    $0.67
Labor, mixing, placing and wheeling
  concrete, 179 hours, at 25 cts.       0.16     2.19
                                       -----    -----
  Total labor cost                     $0.21    $2.86

With the ordinary 1-3-5 mixture the cost of materials would run about as
follows:

                                 Per cu. yd.
Cement, 0.96 bbl., at $2.           $1.92
Sand, 0.47 cu. yd., at $1.13         0.53
Stone, 0.78 cu. yd., at $1.88        1.47
                                    -----
  Total cost materials              $3.92

Two men were worked in the trench, one alternately ramming the concrete
into place and working the jack, and the other shaping the trench ahead
and assisting in bringing the rear forms ahead.

The form described was invented by Mr. Robert R. Evans, of Haverhill,
Mass., and has been patented by him.

~29-FT. SEWER, ST. LOUIS, MO.~--The following account of the method and
cost of constructing 162 ft. of very large sewer section at St. Louis,
Mo., is compiled from information furnished by Mr. Curtis Hill.

The cross-section of the sewer is given by Fig. 261, which also shows
the arrangement of the reinforcing bars. Johnson corrugated bars, old
style, are used for reinforcement. The sections of the various
reinforcing bars are: Longitudinal bars, 0.18 sq. in.; invert bars, 0.7
sq. in., and arch bars, 0.7 sq. in. The spacing of the bars and the
arrangement of the splices are indicated on the drawings of Fig. 261.
All splices have a lap of 36 ins. Some gravel concrete has been used in
the invert, but most of the concrete has been crushed limestone and
Mississippi River channel sand. The proportions were 1-3-6 in the invert
and 1-2-5 in the arch. The arch was computed by Prof. Greene's method.
The ultimate strength of concrete in compression was taken as 2,000 lbs.
per sq. in. and the working strength at 500 lbs. per sq. in. The elastic
limit of the reinforcing bars was taken at 50,000 lbs.

[Illustration: Fig. 261.--Harlem Creek Sewer, St. Louis, Mo.]

The trenching was done by wheel scrapers to the amount of waste. Then a
cableway was erected spanning the entire length of the section and the
remainder of the material taken out. The last 4 or 5 ft. in depth were
in limestone and the excavated rock was taken by cableway to dump carts
which took it to the crusher and returned with crushed rock to be used
for concrete. This rock foundation was taken advantage of to reduce the
amount of invert concrete.

In constructing the sewer proper the invert was first concreted to
template to the height shown in Fig. 262. The arch forms were then
placed as shown in Fig. 262, and the roof arch concreted. Both templates
and arch forms were constructed of wood. The arch forms were moved ahead
on iron rails and jacked into place. The ribs were 2×10-in. pieces and
were spaced 4 ft. on centers; the lagging was 2-in. tongue and grooved
stuff and was smeared with crude oil. The reinforcing bars shown in Fig.
261 were bent to proper radius by means of a wagon tire bender and were
held in place by templates. The concrete was all mixed by two Chicago
Improved Cube mixers operated by electric power.

[Illustration: Fig. 262.--Center for Harlem Creek Sewer.]

The cost records of constructing the section of 29-ft. sewer so far
built are not susceptible of complete analysis, but the following
figures can be given. The prices of materials were as follows:

Cement, per barrel               $1.80
Sand, per cubic yard              0.75
Broken stone, per cubic yard      1.00
Reinforcing bars, per pound       0.02
Vitrified brick, per 1,000       12.00

The wages paid different classes of labor were:

                  Per hour.
Firemen            $0.50
Laborers            0.175
Laborers            0.20
Laborers            0.25
Laborers            0.28
Laborers            0.3025
Bricklayers         0.66 2/3
Helpers            $0.25
Carpenters          0.55
Engineers           0.50
Timekeepers         0.25
Watchmen           0.175
Hostlers           0.175
Teams               0.60

Taking up the several items of work in order, the excavation amounted to
21,400 cu. yds., of which 1,400 cu. yds. were rock excavation. The cost
of excavation was as follows:

                              Total.    Per cu. yd.
Earth, excavation             $7,640        $0.38
Earth bracing                  2,000         0.10
Rock excavation                1,400         1.00
Rock, dynamite, tools, etc.      560         0.40

The cost of crushing the excavated rock and returning it to the mixer
was $1 per cu. yd.

The cost of the concrete work was as follows:

Per cu. yd.
1.30 bbl. cement at $1.80        $2.34
.044 cu. yd. sand at 75 cts.      0.33
1 cu. yd. broken stone at $1      1.00
                                 -----
  Total concrete materials       $3.67

There were 1,600 cu. yds. of concrete placed at a cost of for:

                                Total.     Per cu. yd.
Mixing and placing              $1,180      $0.7375
Forms                            2,000       1.25
Moving forms                       400       0.25
                                ------      -------
  Total for forms and labor     $3,580      $2.2375

For reinforcing the concrete 86,600 lbs. of steel, or about 55 lbs. per
cu. yd. were used. The cost of placing and bending this steel was as
follows:

                   Total.      Per lb.
Cost of placing    $172      0.1986 ct.
Cost of bending      52      0.06   ct.

We can now summarize the cost of the concrete work proper of this sewer
as follows:

  Items.                         Per cu. yd.
Cement, sand and stone                 $3.67
55 lbs. steel at 2 cts.                 1.10
Forms, labor and materials              1.25
Mixing and placing concrete labor       0.74
Placing steel at 0.1986 ct. per lb.     0.11
Bending steel at 0.06 ct. per lb.       0.03
Moving forms                            0.25
                                       -----
  Total labor and materials            $7.15

To get the total cost of the sewer proper we must add the cost of the
vitrified brick invert paving. There were 71 cu. yds. of this paving and
its cost was as follows:

                                     Per cu. yd.
0.6 bbls. cement at $1.80                 $1.08
0.25 cu. yd. sand at 75 cts.              0.19
450 bricks at $12 per M.                  5.40
Labor laying, 71 cu. yds. at $180.33      2.54
                                         -----
Total                                    $9.21

None of the preceding figures includes the plant charges. The plant cost
$12,000 and the cost of running it during the work described was $2,000.
In explanation it should be noted that the plant served for building
some 1,340 lin. ft. of 27-ft. sewer as well as for the section
described.

~SEWER AT MIDDLESBOROUGH, KY.~--In constructing an oval sewer 4 ft. high
at Middlesborough, Ky., two steel forms in 10-ft. sections were used. As
shown in Fig. 263, T-iron ribs were spaced 5 ft. apart, fastened
together at the top by longitudinal angle irons, and at the bottom by a
sheet of steel 22 ins. wide, forming the bottom of the invert. The
lagging for the sides consists of movable 5-ft. lengths of channel iron,
secured by sliding bolts. After the bottom of the trench has been
roughly shaped with concrete, a 10-ft. section of invert forms is
lowered and suspended by the cross-beams, and the space beneath packed
with concrete; then a channel iron is slid into place and bolted, and
concrete packed behind it, and so on until the invert is made. The next
10-ft. section is then built while the first is hardening. Upon the
completion of the second section, the channel iron sides of the first
section are removed, and then the rib framework is lifted out. Wood arch
centers are then put in place and an inch of 1:2 plaster spread over the
lagging before placing the concrete for the arch, which is 6 ins. thick.

[Illustration: Fig. 263.--Invert Form for Sewer Construction.]

The cost per 100 ft. of this sewer was as follows (prices being assumed
for cement and labor):

  Bottom concrete.               Cost per 100 ft.
18.5 bbls. cement, at $1.50          $ 27.75
2.7 cu. yds. sand, at $1.00.            2.70
15 cu. yds. stone, at $1.00            15.00
17 days labor, at $1.50                25.50

  Bottom concrete.              Cost per 100 ft.
25.25 bbls. cement, at $1.50           37.85
7.5 cu. yds. sand, at $1.00             7.50
22 days labor, at $1.50                33.00

  Sewer Arch.
26 bbls. cement, at $1.50              39.00
3.9 cu. yds. sand, at $1.00             3.90
13.6 cu. yds. stone, at $1.00          13.60
21 days labor, at $1.50                31.50
                                     -------
  Cost per 100 ft.                   $237.30

[Illustration: Fig. 264.--Sewer at Cleveland, Ohio.]

~INTERCEPTING SEWERS, CLEVELAND, O.~--An intercepting sewer some 3½ miles
long, of the form and construction shown in Fig. 264, was built at
Cleveland, Ohio, in 1904. The construction consists of a plain concrete
invert lined with two courses of shale bricks, and having two rows of
anchor bars set in the side walls so that the bars of one row are
staggered with respect to those of the other row. The anchor bars are
2×½-in. steel, and are spaced 30 ins. apart in each row. To the anchor
bars are bolted arch reinforcing bars arranged as shown, and these arch
bars have bolted to them eight lines of 1½×¼-in. longitudinal bars. A
natural cement concrete is used for the invert and side walls. The arch
is Portland cement concrete of normally a 1-3-7½, 1½-in. screened stone
mixture, but where the voids in the broken stone exceeded 40 per cent.,
it is a 1-3-6 mixture. The invert bricks are laid in Portland cement
mortar and the arch has a mortar lining and is waterproofed with 1-in.
of mortar on top.

_Forms._--Separate forms were used for the invert and for the arch ring.
Regarding these, the engineer, Mr. Walter C. Parmley, remarks:

One of the first forms used in the sewer was like a piece of segmental
arch centering inverted, and with the lagging nailed fast to the ribs.
The trouble with this form is that it is difficult to tamp concrete
under the bottom portion of the form, and hence a very rough surface is
produced. Much better results were obtained by omitting the lagging
boards on the bottom and at the sides till a point was reached where the
inclination of the concrete surface was about 45°. The concrete for the
bottom could then be worked down between the ribs, thorough tamping
done, and a good surface obtained. The ribs serve as a guide, so that
the workman produces the proper shape. From this point up to the
vertical, good results can be secured with the ribs attached to the
lagging. Some contractors found it more convenient to use ribs that were
connected with each other by a skeleton framework only, and then to slip
the lagging in, one piece at a time. For some of the sewers, in which
the brick lining was not carried quite up to the spring line, a separate
side form of skeleton ribs and loose lagging was set upon brace legs
bearing on the bottom of the invert. This form carried the concrete from
about 2 ft. below to about 2 ft. above the springing line. The arch ribs
then became segmental and rested upon the middle braces. This method has
the advantage of using ribs that are lighter and more easily handled
than those that are semi-circular. For arch centering, it is necessary
and convenient to use independent ribs and loose lagging, for the
centers can then be carried forward piece-meal, the falsework upholding
the green arch and re-erected at the advance end of the work. In these
matters each contractor prefers to use his own ingenuity, and so long as
the work is properly built, the engineer can well give him considerable
latitude as to use of methods. One thing, however, the engineer must
insist upon--that all centering and falsework be as nearly rigid as
possible. Even a slight settlement of the centers at the crown under the
load of concrete and back-fill will cause the arch to kick out at the
quarters, and if the green concrete arch is not cracked at the crown, it
will be crushed on the inside, about half way between the crown and
springing line. A reinforced arch is no more immune to this danger than
is a plain concrete arch. However, with a few days of hardening,
although the damage may be serious, the danger of actual collapse is
less. A point to be guarded against, especially in reinforced
construction, is any foolish act on the part of contractor or workman,
due to his overconfidence in the strength of the structure because it
contains embedded steel.

The mode of procedure in constructing the arch ring was to erect the
centers with lagging complete. The lagging was then covered with
building paper waterproofed with paraffine. The arch reinforcing bars
were then bolted to the anchor bars and the longitudinals connected up.
The lining of Portland cement mortar was first laid on the lagging.
Before this mortar had set, concrete was rammed in between it and the
sheeting to a height of 18 ins. above the springing line, and then the
remainder of the concrete placed without outside forms. The top of the
arch ring was finally finished with a 1-in. mortar coat. In regard to
the concrete, Mr. Parmley remarks:

"Concrete will flush up to the forms and produce a better surface, and
the voids in the stone will be much better filled if it is so wet as to
require but little tamping; moreover there is less danger of obtaining a
weak, porous wall should a workman neglect thorough tamping, than there
is where only a moist mixture is used. It is also to the contractor's
interest to use wet concrete for much less labor is required in mixing
and placing it. Small broken stone or gravel is preferable in concrete
for sewers. The walls being comparatively thin, unless there be a
considerable excess of mortar, if coarse stones are used, the concrete
will be honeycombed with voids. The stones should be well graded in size
from large to fine, but the largest fragments should not exceed 1½ ins.
in greatest dimension."

_Cost._--A number of records of cost of constructing short sections of
the sewer described are given by Mr. Parmley, as follows:

  Labor placing anchor bars.                   Per day.
1 man, at $3.50                                   $3.50
1 man, at $1.75                                    1.75
4 hours carrying steel at 20 cts.                  0.80
                                                  -----
                                                  $6.05

The anchor bars were placed for 40 lin. ft. of sewer, or about 1,504
lbs. of metal at a cost of 0.4 ct. per lb.

The concreting gang for the sides consisted of:

5 men wheeling and mixing at $1.75                   $8.75
1 man tamping                                         1.75
2/3 time man lowering brick and concrete at $2.25     1.50
1 man carrying concrete                               1.75
                                                    ------
                                                    $13.75

This gang built the side wall for 40 ft. of sewer daily, or 13 cu. yds.
Cost of labor per cu. yd. was, therefore, $1.06. The concrete was tamped
behind the brick lining as the latter was built up by the mason.

Cost of single ring brick lining at sides:

2 masons at 70 cents per hour                        $1.20
1 man mixing mortar                                   2.25
1/3 time man lowering at $2.25                        0.75
3 men wheeling sand, filling buckets and dumping      5.25
                                                    ------
  Total labor for 40 lin. ft. of sewer              $19.45
Quantity of brick masonry laid, cu. yd.               6.38
Labor per cu. yd.                                     3.05

An account was kept of labor performed on 85 lin. ft. of arch work, or
14 1-6 ft. daily. The force was as follows:

1 man putting mortar lining on centering             $1.75
2 men mixing mortar, screening and wheeling sand      3.50
1 man tamping concrete                                1.75
8 men on mixing board at $1.75                       14.00
                                                    ------
                                                    $21.00
No. cu. yd. placed daily                             25.64
Labor per cu. yd.                                     0.82
  Placing centering and arch bars:
2 men at $1.75                                       $3.50
1 man at $3.50                                        3.50
                                                     -----
                                                     $7.00

Costs, for 14 1-6 ft. daily, $0.49 per lin. ft.

As nearly as could be judged, about two-thirds of the labor was used in
erecting the centering and one-third in putting the steel in place. The
amount of steel placed daily was 785 lbs., at cost, therefore, of 0.3 of
a cent per lb., and the cost of erecting and moving centers, $0.33 per
lin. ft. of arch.

Another record of 39.27 ft. on a curve, gave for the cost of the brick
work at sides the same result as above, but the inspector's record of
men working on concrete backing at sides showed a less cost, as follows:

4 men mixing at $1.75                             $7.00
2/3 time man lowering at $2.25                     1.50
1 man in bottom                                    1.75
                                                  -----
                                                 $10.25

They placed 12.7 cu. yd. at a cost of $0.81 per cu. yd. This figure
probably more nearly represents the average cost than the $1.06 reported
in the first instance.

The cost of placing the anchor bars on straight sewer, representing
average progress, at another time, was found to be:

1 man                                             $3.50
1 man                                              1.75
                                                  -----
                                                  $5.25

They placed the steel for 44 ft. of sewer or 1,650 lb. at a cost of 0.32
of a cent per lb.

Further notes for 6 days' work, when it seemed to represent as nearly as
possible the general average for the whole were:

Labor on arch concrete:

Daily progress was 13 1-6 ft.

  The force employed was:
7 men making concrete, at $1.75      $12.25
1 man plastering the center            1.75
1 man mixing mortar                    2.00
1 man tamping                          1.75
                                      -----
                                     $17.75

On straight arch work they placed 24.1 cu. yd. daily at a cost of $0.74
per cu. yd. In three days' work on a curve, the same gang placed 26.37
cu. yd. daily at a cost of $0.675 per cu. yd.

On centering and steel for arch, three men kept up with the regular
progress of the arch-concreting gang. The cost, therefore, is:

1 man                             $3.50
2 men at $1.75                     3.50
                                  -----
                                  $7.00

They averaged 13 ft. daily, or at a total cost of about $0.54 per lin.
ft. of sewer.

Two-thirds of this labor was on the centering or $0.36 per lin. ft. of
arch; $0.18 per lin. ft. placed the steel ready for embedding, or about
55.5 lb. per ft. of arch, at a cost of 0.32 of a cent per lb.

For the double ring brick lining at the bottom, the regular daily rate
of progress was 28 ft. or 11.15 cu. yd. with:

2 bricklayers                    $11.20
5 men at $1.75                     8.75
1 man at $2.25                     2.25
                                  -----
                                 $22.20

or at a cost of $1.98 per cu. yd. This is given only because it is of
interest in connection with the cost of the concrete.

Other observations on cost of placing steel skeleton and concrete did
not vary materially from the figures given. It will be observed that no
charge for superintendence or anything for the general expenses is
included in the estimates of cost. These charges were, of course,
impossible to obtain. On another contract with machine mixing, as high
as 36 lin. ft. of 13 ft. 6 in. arch were built in a day, but no data as
to cost were taken, though it was evidently less than for the work with
hand-mixed concrete.

~REINFORCED CONCRETE SEWER AT WILMINGTON, DEL.~--Records of a notable job
of sewer construction at Wilmington, Del., in 1903, are furnished by Mr.
T. Chalkley Hatton. The sewer was built by day labor for the city; its
cross-section at various points is shown by Fig. 265. The cross-section
of sewers in trenches deep enough to cover the arch are marked "deep
cutting"; the sections where the arch projects above the ground surface
are marked "light cutting." The section through the marsh was 700 ft.
long, the cutting being 8 ft. deep, and at high tide the marsh was
flooded 1 to 4 ft. The material was a soft mud that would pull a tight
rubber boot from a workman's foot. The cost of this marsh excavation
including cofferdams, underdraining, pumping, etc., was $4.60 per cu.
yd. For 1,100 ft. the 9¼ ft. sewer was through a cut 22 to 34 ft. deep,
the material being clay underlaid by granite. A Carson-Lidgerwood
cableway was used. Although the crown of the arch was but 8 ins. thick,
it withstood the shock of dumping 1 cu. yd. buckets of earth and rock
from heights of 3 to 10 ft.; and the weight of 25 ft. of loose filling
caused no cracks in the concrete.

Concrete was placed in 4-in. layers (the depth of the lagging) and well
rammed, since it was found that "wet" concrete left small honeycombed
spaces on the inner surface. Concrete for the invert was 1-2-6, the
stone being 1½-in. and smaller, and the sand being crusher dust. The
arch was 1-2-5.

The reinforcing metal used in the 9½-ft. sewer was No. 6 expanded metal,
6-in. mesh, in sheets 8×5½ ft., supplied by Merritt & Co., of
Philadelphia. A single layer was placed around the sewer, 2 ins. from
the inner surface, its position being carefully maintained by the men
ramming, and with but little difficulty as the sheets were first bent to
the radius of the circle. Each sheet was lapped one mesh (6 ins.) over
its neighbor at both ends and sides, and no sheets were wired except the
top ones, which were liable to displacement by men walking over them.

[Illustration: Fig. 265.--Cross-Sections of Sewer at Wilmington, Del.]

The metal used on the rest of the work was a wire-woven fabric furnished
by the Wight-Easton-Townsend Co., of New York. This fabric comes in
rolls 5½ ft. wide and 100 ft. to the roll. The wire is No. 8, with a
6×4-in. mesh. This fabric was placed by first cutting the sheets to the
required length to surround the sewer entirely, embedding it in the
concrete as fast as concrete was placed, in the same manner as was done
with the expanded metal except over the center where, on account of its
pliability, the fabric was held the proper distance from the lagging by
a number of 2-in. blocks which were removed as the concrete was placed.
The wire cloth, being all in one sheet, can be placed a little more
expeditiously than expanded metal, but, on the other hand, the expanded
metal holds its position better in the concrete, since it is more rigid.

We quote now from Mr. Hatton's letter: "The major portion of concrete
was mixed by machine at a cost of 66 cts. per yard, including wheeling
to place, coal and running of mixing machine, wages being $1.50 per day
of 8 hrs, Stone was delivered alongside of machine and all material had
to be wheeled in barrows upon the platform, and after mixing to the
sewer. Placing and ramming concrete around the forms cost 39 cts. per
cu. yd., additional. Setting forms in invert cost 2 cts. per cu. yd.,
setting centers 7 cts. per cu. yd. Cost of setting forms and centers
includes placing steel metal. Each lineal foot of 9¼ ft. sewer contained
1 cu. yd. of concrete, although the section only calls for 0.94 cu. yd.
The excess was usually wasted by falling over sides of forms or being
made too thick at crown.

"This yard of 1-2-5 concrete cost in place as follows (record taken as
an average of several-days' run):

Cement, 1.31 bbls. at $1.30                            $1.703
Stone, 0.84 cu. yds. at $1.21                           1.016
Stone dust, 0.42 cu. yd. at $1.21                       0.508
Labor at 18¾ cts. per hour                              0.987
Labor setting forms and setting metal                   0.045
Cost of forms (distributed over 1,800 ft. of sewer)     0.082
40 sq. ft. expanded metal at 4¼ cts.                    1.700
Labor plastering invert                                 0.070
                                                       ------
  Cost per ft., or per cu. yd.                         $6.111

"The forms for the invert were made of 2-in. rough hemlock boards cut
out 4 ins. less diameter than the diameter of the sewer, except for 18
ins. at the bottom of the form which coincided with the inside form of
sewer. The bottom of the sewers was laid to the bottom of this form
before it was set. Then the lagging, consisting of 2×6-in.×16-ft.
hemlock planed, was placed against each side of the form, one at a time,
and the concrete brought to the line of this top in 6-in. layers until
the whole invert was finished. These forms were set in 16-ft. sections,
five to each section.

"The centers consisted of seven ribs of 2-in. hemlock upon which was
nailed 1½-in. lagging, 2 ins. wide, tongued and grooved, and were 16 ft.
long, non-collapsible, but had one wing on each side, 9 ins. wide, which
could be wedged out to fit any inaccuracies in the invert. We used four
of these centers setting two at each operation and worked from two ends.
We left the centers in for 18 hours before drawing.

"The cost of the concrete on the smaller sewers was the same as are the
larger sewers, but the steel metal cost less, as it was wire woven metal
that cost 2½ cts. per sq. ft. It was much easier handled and cut to no
waste as it came in long rolls and was very pliable.

"After training our men, which occupied about one week or 10 days, we
had no difficulty in getting the concrete well placed around the metal,
preserving the proper location of the latter, which, however, bore
constant watching, as a careless workman would often take the temporary
supporting blocks and allow the metal to rest against the wooden center,
in which case the metal would show through the surface inside of the
sewer. The metal was kept 2 ins. away from the inside forms and the
arch. To keep it at this location we had several 2-in. wooden blocks cut
which were slipped under the wire or expanded metal and as soon as some
concrete was pushed under the wire at this point the block was removed.

"After the forms were removed the invert needed plastering, but the arch
was practically like a smoothly plastered wall except where it joined
the invert, where it frequently showed the result of too much hurry in
depositing the first loads of concrete on the arch. We remedied this by
requiring less concrete to be deposited at the start, thus giving the
rammers time to place the material properly.

"An interesting result was obtained in the smoothness of the inside
surface by using a mixture of different sized stones. When ¾-in. stones
or smaller were used in the arch, the inside was honeycombed; but, where
1 to 1½-in. stones (nothing smaller) were used, the inside was perfectly
smooth, and the same was true of the invert, showing that the use of
larger stones is an advantage and secures more monolithic work. When the
run of the crusher from 1½ to ¾-in. stones was used the work was not at
all satisfactory.

"The difference in cost of mixing by hand and machine is practically
nothing on this kind of work. As the moving of the machine to keep pace
with the progress of the work equals the extra cost of mixing by hand
when the mixing can be done close to the point where the cement is being
placed."

The total cost of the sewers, including excavation, etc., was:

                                         Cost per lin. ft.
9¼-ft. sewer through marsh                      $32.00
9¼-ft. sewer in cut averaging 24½ ft.            24.00
6½-ft. sewer in cut averaging 12 ft.             10.00
5-ft. sewer in cut averaging 11½ ft.              6.70

~SEWER WITH MONOLITHIC INVERT AND BLOCK ARCH.~--The following records of
construction for a sewer built at Coldwater, Mich., in 1901, are given
by Mr. H. V. Gifford. The sewer had a monolithic invert and a block
arch.

The sewer was circular, having an inner diameter of 42 ins., the
thickness of the invert and the arch alike was 8 ins. Figure 266 is a
cross-section. The concrete was 1 of Portland cement to 6 of gravel.
There were 11 concrete blocks in the ring of the arch, each block being
24 ins. long, 8 ins. thick, 8 ins. wide on the outside of the arch and
5¾ ins. wide on the inside of the arch. A block weighed 90 lbs. which
was too heavy for rapid laying; blocks 18 ins. long would have been
better. Some 8,500 blocks were made. Molds were of 2-in. lumber, lined
with tin, for after a little use it was found the concrete would stick
to the wood when the mold was removed. The four sides of the mold formed
the extrados, the intrados, and the two ends of the block; the other two
sides being left open. When put together the mold was laid upon a 1-in.
board, 12×30 ins., reinforced by cleats across the bottom. The sides of
the molds were held together with screws or wedge clamps. When the
blocks had set, the sides of the molds were removed, and the blocks were
left on the 12×30-in. boards for 3 days, then piled up, being watered
several times each day for a week.

A gang of 14 men made the blocks; 2 screening gravel through 1-in. mesh
screen; 4 mixing concrete; 4 molders; 3 shifting and watering blocks,
and 1 foreman. With a little practice each molder could turn out 175
blocks a day; and since each block measured ¾ cu. ft., the output of the
14 men was 19½ cu. yds. a day. Mr. Gifford informs us that the wages
were $1.50 a day for all the men, except the foreman. The daily wages of
the 14 men were $22, so that the labor of making the blocks was $1.10
per cu. yd.

[Illustration: Fig. 266.--Sewer with Monolithic Invert and Block Arch.]

Each batch of concrete, containing ½ bbl. of Portland cement costing
$1.35 per bbl., made 18 blocks. (1 bbl. per cu. yd.) Since the gravel
cost nothing, except the labor of screening it, the total cost of each
block was 11 to 12 cts., which includes 0.85 cent for use of molds and
mold boards, which were an entire loss. At 12 cts. per block the cost
was $4.32 per cu. yd.

The contract price was $3 per lin. ft. of this sewer, as against a bid
of $3.40 per ft. for a brick sewer.

When the trenching had reached to the level of the top of the invert,
two rows of stakes were driven in the bottom, stakes being 6 ft. apart
in each row, and rows being a distance apart ¼-in. greater than the
outer diameter of the sewer. These stakes were driven to such a grade
that the top of a 2×4-in. cap or "runner" set edgewise on top of them
was at the proper grade of the top of the invert. The excavation for the
invert was then begun, and finished to the proper curve by the aid of a
templet drawn along the 2×4-in. runners. In gravel it was impossible to
hold the true curve of the invert bottom. Concrete was then placed for
the invert. To hold up the sides of the invert concrete, a board served
as a support for the insides, but regular forms were more satisfactory
in every respect except that they were in the way of the workmen. A form
was tried, its length being 6 ft. It was built like the center for an
arch, except that the sheeting was omitted on the lower part of the
invert. It was suspended from the cross-pieces resting on the "runners."
After the concrete had been rounded in place, the form was removed and
the invert trued up. This form worked well in soil that could be
excavated a number of feet ahead, so that the forms could be drawn ahead
instead of having to be lifted out; but in soil, where the concreting
must immediately follow the excavation for the invert, the form is in
the way. The invert was trued up by drawing along the runners a
semi-circular templet having a radius of 21½ ins. Then a ½-in. coat of
1-2 mortar was roughly troweled on the green concrete. Another templet
having a 21-in. radius was then drawn along the runners to finish the
invert.

When the plaster had hardened, two courses of concrete blocks were laid
on each shoulder of the invert, using a 1-2-¼ mortar, the ¼ part
being lime paste. The lime made the mortar more plastic and easier to
trowel. Then the form for the arch was placed, and as each 8-ft. section
of the arch was built, a grout of 1-1 mortar was poured over the top
to fill the joints. Earth was thrown on each shoulder and tamped, and
the center moved ahead.

Common laborers were used for all the invert work, except the plastering
which was done by masons who were paid 30 cts. per hr. Masons were also
used to lay the concrete blocks in the arch. Mr. Gifford states that two
masons would lay at the rate of 100 lin. ft. of arch per day, if enough
invert were prepared in advance. As there were 11 blocks in the ring of
the arch, this rate would be equivalent to 7½ cu. yds. of arch laid per
mason per day.

[Illustration: Fig. 267.--Concrete Block Manhole.]

~COST OF BLOCK MANHOLES.~--The following costs of constructing concrete
block manholes for electric conduit at Rye, N. Y., were recorded by Mr.
Hugh C. Baker, Jr. The arrangement of the blocks, their size and shape
and the dimensions of the completed manholes are shown by Fig. 267. The
blocks were molded of 1-2-5¾-in. broken stone concrete in 30 wooden
molds made by a local carpenter at a cost of from $3.50 to $12 each. The
concrete was placed in the molds very wet, with very little tamping, and
was allowed to set for seven days before the blocks were moved to the
work. The molds were left in place from 24 to 36 hours. With the
facilities at hand six complete sets of top blocks were made each day by
four men, when no wall blocks were being made, and half a set (15) wall
blocks and two sets of top blocks were made each day by four men. The
cost of the block manholes complete was as follows, per manhole:

30 wall blocks, 2½ cu. yds.                        $21.00
6 cover blocks, 1½ cu. yds. reinforced               4.27
I-beams for cover, in place                          5.40
Supervision, freight, hauling 5.6 tons concrete      9.38
Labor placing cover, 3 hrs. at 15 cts.               0.45
Labor placing walls, 20 hrs. at 15 cts.              3.00
                                                   ------
  Total, exclusive of iron cover                   $43.50

~CEMENT PIPE, CONSTRUCTED IN PLACE.~--In constructing 8-in. cement sewer
for the Foster Armstrong Piano Co.'s works at Rochester, N. Y., a gang
of seven men averaged 300 ft. of pipe per 10-hour day, using a Ransome
pipe mold. The mold is shown by Fig. 268. It is made of sheet steel,
with an inner core 10 ft. long, the front end of which is surrounded
with a sheet steel shell that serves as an outer form for the pipe. The
mortar mixed rather dry was packed into the annular space between core
and shell by one man, using a short wooden rammer. A second man kept the
mold slowly moving forward by operating the lever, which by means of a
ratchet and drum winds up a wire rope stretched ahead to a deadman in
the trench bottom. As the mold moves ahead it leaves behind it the
cement pipe. A third man carefully filled under the invert and over the
haunches of the green pipe with earth to give it support. The following
was the itemized cost per day, 300 ft. of pipe laid:

6 men at $1.70 per 10-hour day     $10.20
1 foreman                            3.00
3 bbls. cement at $1.25              3.75
3.3 cu. yds. sand at 85 cts.         2.80
Water                                0.15
                                   ------
  Total for 300 lin. ft.           $19.90

This is equivalent to 6.63 cts. per lin. ft. of pipe.

[Illustration: Fig. 268.--Ransome Continuous Mold for Concrete Pipe
Construction.]

In Trans. C. E., Vol. 31, 1894, p. 153, James D. Schuyler gives the cost
of cement pipe made by the Ransome system for the Denver Water Works.
There is a wrought iron shell of the size of the inner diameter of the
pipe forming the inner mold. To this shell is attached a "leader" and
"saddle" of larger diameter forming the outer mold. These molds are
drawn slowly along the trench by a cable and horse whim, and the
concrete is shoveled continuously into the core space between the molds
and rammed on a long incline. The top half, or arch, of the pipe is
supported by sheet iron plates (2 ft. wide), placed one after another on
the forward end of the mold; and, being clamped together at the top and
sides, remain in position after the mold is slid out from under them.
After the mold has passed along, these iron plates are supported by
upright sticks and by horizontal clamping rods. The plates are left in
place for 24 to 48 hrs. The concrete, made 1-3½, river sand and gravel,
was machine mixed. A gang of 30 men mixed, wheeled, shoveled and tamped
the concrete, attended to the plates, cleaning and greasing them, etc.
This gang would make short runs at the rate of 900 lin. ft. of pipe a
day, but counting stoppages, the average rate was 300 ft. a day. The
inner diameter of the pipe was 38 ins., and its bottom was molded flat
for a width of 18 ins. The concrete shell was 2½ to 3 ins. thick. The
pipe was washed with pure cement grout, applied with brushes after
removing the iron plates. With cement at $3.75 per bbl., gravel at $1.25
per cu. yd., and labor at $1.75 to $2 per day, the cost of this pipe was
$1.35 to $1.50 per ft., after the gang was well organized.

~PIPE SEWER, ST. JOSEPH, MO.~--In constructing extensions to 36-in.,
42-in., 48-in. and 72-in. sewers at St. Joseph, Mo., reinforced concrete
pipe of the form shown by Fig. 269 was employed. The thickness of shell
for the various sizes was 4 ins., 4½ ins., 5 ins., and 7 ins. All sizes
were made in 3-ft. lengths, one end of which is rebated and beveled to
form a spigot and the other end of which is chamfered on the inner edge
to receive the bevel of the spigot. This jointing leaves a
circumferential groove, into which the hooked ends of the longitudinal
reinforcing bars project in such a way that a circular hoop can be
threaded through them to connect successive lengths. The reinforcement
is of the same form for all sizes of pipe, but seven longitudinals were
used in the 72-in. size and five for all smaller sizes; the
circumferential bars were in all cases spaced one 9 ins. from each end.
The pipe, as described, is the standard pipe made by the Reinforced
Concrete Pipe Co., of Jackson, Mich., and is covered by patents. The
practice of this company is to manufacture the pipe itself on the ground
and furnish it to the contractor. It does not contract to build sewers
nor does it dispose of rights to manufacture to contractors.

[Illustration: Fig. 269.--Jackson Concrete Sewer Pipe.]

_Pipe Molding._--The pipe is molded endwise. A bottom plate so shaped as
to form the hub or receiving end of the pipe is set up. On the upper or
inner flange of this cast iron bottom plate is set the core defining the
inside diameter of the pipe; this core is in four segments of sheet
steel. The longitudinal reinforcing bars are next inserted in slots in
the bottom plate and the outside form of sheet steel is then set up on
the lower and outer flange of the bottom plate. Spacing clips on the top
edge of the outer shell hold the tops of the reinforcing bars in
position. The concrete is then shoveled into the annular mold and tamped
until it reaches the level for the first circumferential reinforcing
bar; this is then placed by removing the spacing clips, threading the
hoop over the longitudinal bars and sliding it down to position. Filling
and tamping then proceeds until the second hoop is to be placed; this is
placed exactly like the first, and filling and tamping then proceeds
until the mold is filled. At the St. Joseph work a 1-2-3 mixture, with
crushed limestone aggregate ranging from pea size to 1-in. stone was
used. The molding was done in tents which were heated by coke fires in
salamanders in freezing weather.

_Pipe Laying._--In laying, the pipes are handled and lowered into
position just as are cast iron water pipe. Successive lengths are placed
by inserting the spigot ends into the chamfered hub ends and then
threading the tie hoop through the hooked ends of the projecting
longitudinal reinforcing bars. A strip of galvanized iron is then passed
under the pipe and bent up so as to girdle the circumferential groove
except for a space at the top; the groove is then poured with a wet 1-2
cement mixture, which, when hardened, completes the joint.

~COST OF MOLDING SMALL CEMENT PIPE.~--Mr. Albert E. Wright gives the
following account of the method and cost of molding and laying 6 to
12-in. cement pipe for irregular work at Irrigon, Ore.: The pipe was 6
to 12 ins. inside, made of Portland cement and clean, sharp sand of all
sizes up to very coarse. The mortar was mixed rather dry, but very
thoroughly, using 14.1 cu. ft. of sand to 1 bbl. of cement, or very
closely a 1 to 4 mixture. From six to seven buckets of water were used
to each barrel of cement, except for the 6-in. pipe, for which the
mortar had to be made somewhat stiffer in order to remove the inner
form, which was not made collapsible as in the larger sizes.

The forms were sheet iron cylinders with a longitudinal lap joint that
could be expanded after molding the pipe, and removed without injuring
the soft mortar. The inner form was self-centering, so that there was
little variation in the thickness of the pipe.

Four men were required in making cement pipe by hand; one mixed the
mortar, and wheeled it to the place of work; another threw it into the
form a little at a time with a hand scoop; a third rammed it with a
tamping iron, and a fourth kept the new pipe sprinkled, and applied a
coat of neat cement slurry to the inside when it was sufficiently hard.
In molding, the form of the bell at the bottom was secured by an iron
ring that was first dropped into the form, and the reverse or convex
form at the top was made with a second ring. While still in its form
the pipe was rolled or lifted into its place in the drying yard, and the
form was then carefully removed. A very slight blow in removing the form
would destroy the pipe, and a considerable number, especially of the
larger sizes, collapsed in this way, and had to be remolded. To avoid
handling, the pipe was stacked on end a few feet from the place of
mixing, the form being moved as the yard filled with pipe. One crew of
four men could make about 250 joints or 500 lin. ft. of pipe a day.

As soon as hard enough, the pipe was turned end for end, and was then
kept wet for several weeks before being laid. The coating of neat cement
on the inside was applied with a short whitewash brush, and was a small
item in the cost.

In laying, the trench was carefully finished to grade in order to have
the joints close nicely, and the ends were well wet with a brush. The
mason then spread mortar, mixed 1 to 2, on the end of the pipe, and laid
a bed of mortar at the bottom of the joint. He then jammed the section
into place, and swabbed out the inside of the joint with a stiff brush,
to insure a smooth passage for the water. A band or ring of mortar was
spread round the outside of the joint as an additional reinforcement.
One barrel of cement would joint about 300 sections of pipe. The
materials cost as follows: Portland cement, per bbl., $4.45; labor, per
day, $2; foremen, per day. $2.50 to $3; hauling, per load mile (1 cu.
yd.), 20 cts.; sand, free at pit; water, free.

The pipe was all of a 1-4 sand and cement mortar, and the amount of
cement in one foot of pipe was arrived at by assuming that where the
sand has voids in excess of the cement used, the mortar will occupy 1.1
(see Chapter II) times the space of the dry sand, which yields the
following formula:

Where--

     c = cost per bbl. of cement, or $4.45.
     n = cu. ft. in one bbl. (taken at 3.5 here).
     s = ratio of sand to cement, or 4.
     d = inside diameter in inches.
     t = thickness of pipe in inches.
     l = length of pipe considered, or 1 ft. here.

Then:

                             c × l × [pi] × (dt + t²)
     Cement-cost per foot = --------------------------,
                                n × s × 1.1 × 144

         which gives here =

                4.45 × 1 × 3.142(dt + t²)
             -------------------------------   =  0.00631(dt + t²).
                  3.5 × 4 × 1.1 × 144

This gave the following cement costs per lineal foot:

Diameter, Thickness,    Cost
  ins.       ins.     per foot.
   6         1¼       $0.0571
   8         1¼        0.0730
  10         1-3/8     0.0998
  12         1½        0.1278

The sand cost was based on 15 cts. per cubic yard for loading, and a
haul of two miles of 1 cu. yd. to the load, making five trips per day,
at $4 for man and team. It bears a constant ratio to cement cost, being
11.2 per cent. of the cement cost. The labor cost of making was based on
the foreman's estimate that a foreman, tamper, mortar mixer, and water
man should finish 250 joints a day of 6 or 8-in. pipe. For the 10 and
12-in. pipe, the labor was assumed to be greater in proportion to the
material. The foreman was taken at $3, one man at $2.50 and two at $2.
The cement for painting the inside was neglected. Hauling the pipe to
place was taken at twice the cost of hauling the sand per mile, and a
haul of 4 miles was assumed. The cost of laying was based on a foreman's
estimate of 2 cts. per foot for trench, and that one man to lay, one man
to plaster the joints, one helper and one man to back-fill would lay 600
ft. per day of 6 or 8-in. pipe. The larger sizes were assumed to cost
more in proportion to their material.

These various costs gave the following results for small size pipe:

                               --Cost per foot for--
           6-in.    8-in.   10-in.   12-in.
           pipe.    pipe.    pipe.    pipe.

Cement    $0.057   $0.073   $0.099   $0.128
Sand       0.006    0.008    0.011    0.014
Labor      0.019    0.019    0.026    0.034
Hauling    0.024    0.032    0.044    0.056
Laying     0.024    0.024    0.032    0.042
Trench     0.020    0.020    0.020    0.020
          ------   ------   ------   ------
Totals.   $0.15    $0.176   $0.232   $0.294

The above costs show that the pipe in place costs about twice as much as
pipe in the yard, even with cement at $4.45.

[Illustration: Fig. 270.--Bordenave Pipe for Swansea, England, Water
Works.]

~MOLDED PIPE WATER MAIN, SWANSEA, ENGLAND.~--As a good example of foreign
practice in molded pipe conduit work a water main constructed at
Swansea, England, has been selected. This pipe line had to operate under
a head of 185 ft.; it was constructed under the patents of the French
engineer, Mr. R. Bordenave, who has built many miles of the same type of
conduit on the Continent.

Fig. 270 shows the construction of the pipe, the drawing being a part
longitudinal section through the shell at the joint. The pipe consists
of an inner and an outer reinforcement separated by a sheet steel tube
and all embedded in a 1-2 mortar. Both inner and outer reinforcements
consists of longitudinal bins of cruciform (+) section wound by a spiral
bar of the same section wired to them at every intersection. Only the
outer reinforcement and the steel tube are considered in calculating the
strength of the pipe, the inner reinforcement being considered as simply
supporting the mortar.

_Fabrication of Reinforcement_.--The steel tube is made of 1 mm. (0.04
in.) thick sheets of steel bent to a cylinder and jointed longitudinally
by welded butt joints, welded by a blow pipe using acetylene and oxygen.
Tests of this welded joint by R. H. Wyrill, Waterworks Engineer,
Swansea, showed it to be quite as strong as the unwelded steel cut from
the shell. The circumferential joints of the tube were made by turning
up the edges of the sheets and welding them; this gives a flexible
watertight joint. The tube was made in lengths of 9 ft. 9½ ins. and its
ends were turned up all around; just back from the turned-up ends a
vertical sheet steel collar was welded to the tube to form a strip end
for the external coating. These details are shown in Fig. 270. When the
tube for a length of pipe is completed the inside shell reinforcement
previously made is slipped into it and the outside shell reinforcement
is formed on it as a mandril, as shown by Fig. 271.

[Illustration: Fig. 271.--Applying External Reinforcement to Bordenave
Pipe.]

[Illustration: Fig. 272.--Casting Bordenave Pipe at Swansea, England.]

_Molding._--When the three positions of the steel skeleton were
completed, as shown by Fig. 271, they were set on curved wooden curbs
made to the exact shape necessary to center them and preserve the
correct thickness of cement coating. A collapsible core was lowered into
position in the inside, and a two-part sheet steel mold was erected
outside; the space between core and mold was then poured with a thin
mortar of one part Portland cement to two parts clean river sand. During
the process of pouring, the outer steel mold is sharply struck with
wooden mallets to facilitate the escape of air bubbles. The mortar was
mixed on an elevated traveling platform which is shown in Fig. 272,
which also shows a completed pipe, a core being withdrawn, a filled mold
and a section of reinforcement set up. The difficult feature of the
molding process was found to be the determination of the time for
withdrawing the core and removing the exterior mold; the time of setting
of the mortar was different in warm and in cool weather and varied with
the wetness of the mixture, the brand of cement, etc. By using a single
brand of cement that ran very uniform in quality and time of setting it
was possible, however, for the workmen, after a little practice, to gage
very accurately the correct time for removing the molds. With four sets
of molds a gang of eight men would curb 16 pipes per day under favorable
conditions, but when the temperature was low it was not possible to make
more than six or eight pipes. The pipes were allowed to stand four or
five days after the removal of the mold; they could then be removed by a
crane and laid in stock until used. It was found advisable to let the
pipes age about four weeks before laying; by this time, it is stated,
they would stand as much rough usage as cast iron pipe.

_Laying_.--The pipes were laid much in the same way as cast-iron pipes
are laid; they were each 9 ft. 9½ ins. long and weighed each about 12
cwt., and were handled by ordinary tackle. In laying, the pipes were
adjusted end to end and the joint enclosed by a temporary steel ring
inside which the bitumen seal, Fig. 270, was run and allowed to set when
the steel ring was removed. The joint was then encircled by a collar of
similar construction to the pipe itself and the space between collar and
pipe was poured with cement mortar. About ten lengths of pipe were laid
per day by one gang of men, one jointer and his assistant making all the
cement and bitumen joints as fast as the gang could lay the pipes.




CHAPTER XXII.

METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING RESERVOIRS AND TANKS.


Floor, wall and roof work of structurally very simple character sum up
the task of the constructor in reservoir and tank construction. The only
intricacy involved lies in form design and construction for cylindrical
tank work. Several examples of such work are given in this chapter, and
in each the construction and handling of the forms are described. To
repeat details here would serve no purpose, but one general instruction
may be enunciated. No care is too great which ensures rigidity and
invariable form, both in the construction of the individual form units
and in the assembling of these units into the complete form. This is
particularly true of cylindrical tank work and especially high
cylindrical tank work where the forms are moved upward as the work
progresses. To the designer it may be suggested that any beauty he may
gain by giving the walls of his standpipe a batter is paid in the extra
cost of form work.

Concreting in tank work is expensive. The reasons are two. The work has
to be done in a narrow space, commonly pretty well filled with a network
of steel rods or bars. Again the work has to be done uniformly well, not
only for appearance sake but because of the necessity of watertightness.
Making a reservoir watertight is, when all things are said, the one
difficult constructional task in tank work and the contractor who
accepts the task lightly courts trouble. Exceptionally good concreting
is essential in tank work if watertightness is to be secured.

The illustration of these general admonitions will be found in the
specific examples of tank and reservoir work which follow.

~SMALL COVERED RESERVOIR.~--The reservoir was designed to hold 75,000
gallons of water for fire purposes. As it is of a type which is certain
to be frequently constructed and as we have personal knowledge of the
costs recorded we describe the work in some detail. The specifications
stipulated that the reservoir must be absolutely watertight and that the
roof should be capable of sustaining a load of 300 tons evenly
distributed and a live load of 5,000 lbs. on two wheels. Figure 273
shows a plan, Fig. 274 a longitudinal section, Fig. 275 a transverse
section and Fig. 276 the column construction.

[Illustration: Fig. 273.--Sectional Plan of 75,000-Gallon Reservoir.]

_Quantities of Work._--The excavation called for the removal of 579 cu.
yds. of earth. There were 83 cu. yds. of concrete in the structure,
although the plans called for less, the additional amount being used in
increasing the two 4-in. walls to 6-in. and increasing the bottom and
top, on one end, so as to give perfect drainage. The yardage was
divided as follows:

                                                  Cu. yds.
Footings                                               3.5
Columns                                                6.8
Sides                                                 22.6
Girders                                               11.0
Top                                                   20.0
Floor                                                 19.1
                                                      ----
      Total                                           83.0

[Illustration: Fig. 274.--Longitudinal Section of 75,000-Gallon
Reservoir.]

A manhole had to be put in the top and a sump in the bottom. Several
pipes also had to be placed in the concrete. None of these details is
shown on the plan. The structure had to be waterproofed.

_Excavation._--The excavation was made with pick and shovel and the
material hauled away in carts, the distance to the dump being 700 ft.
The top was shoveled directly into the carts, while the rest was handled
two and three times. When the reservoir was finished dirt had to be
filled in around the sides and puddled.

_Wages._--The following rates of wages were paid on the job:

Foreman                                           $3.00
Carpenter                                          3.50
Carts and driver                                   3.50
Laborers                                           1.50

The carpenters worked 8 hours a day and were paid time and a half for
overtime. The rest worked ten hours per day and were paid regular rates
for overtime.

[Illustration: Fig. 275.--Transverse Section of 75,000-Gallon
Reservoir.]

_Forms._--Carpenters framed and erected the forms, but laborers did all
the carrying for them. Laborers also tore down the forms. For the
girders and columns 2-in. boards were used, but for the sides 1-in.
boards with 3×4-in. scantlings were used. The props for supporting the
girder and top forms were 3×4. Except for columns and girders and some
props, all the forming was used three times. The lumber cost:

400 ft. B. M. at $24      $ 9.60
8,000 ft. B. M. at $18    144.00
                         -------
  Total                  $153.60

[Illustration: Fig. 276.--Column Construction for 75,000-Gallon
Reservoir.]

This makes an average price per 1,000 ft. of about $18.30, which price
we shall use in giving costs.

The cost of framing and erecting the forms was $167.27 for the sides,
columns, girders and top. In the forms for the sides, forming was only
used on one side of the concrete for two sides, the earth bank being
used for the other side of the forms, but on the other two sides the
banks had caved in, and forming was used on both sides of the wall. The
cost per cubic yard for forms was:

Lumber                     $2.54
Framing and erecting        2.77
Tearing down                 .54
                           -----
  Total                    $5.85

This cost is for the yardage of 60.4 on which forms were actually used.
For the total yardage in the tank the cost was:

Lumber                     $1.85
Framing and erecting        2.01
Tearing down                 .40
                           -----
  Total                    $4.26

The common labor cost of assisting to erect the forms was 15 per cent of
the total. Nothing is allowed for foreman, for the contractor acted as
his own foreman.

The cost of forms per 1,000 ft. for the amount of lumber purchased was:

Lumber                    $18.30
Framing and erecting       19.90
Tearing down                4.00
                          ------
Total                     $42.20

As the lumber was used three times, the cost per thousand for all work
and materials on the forms would be just one-third of this--namely:
$14.06.

Since the framing, erecting and tearing down cost $19.90 plus $4, or
$23.90 per M. ft. B. M. purchased, and since the lumber was used three
times, the labor cost nearly $8 per M. each time that the lumber was
used. It will be noted that 8,400 ft. B. M. were required for the 83 cu.
yds. of concrete, or a trifle more than 100 ft. B. M. per cubic yard.

It will be of interest to see the labor costs of forms for the various
parts of the structure.

For the sides the cost of framing and erecting the forms was $4.19 per
cubic yard. Of this cost 4 per cent. was for common labor and the rest
for carpenters. The tearing down cost 47 cts. per cubic yard. For the
columns the erecting was $2.35, of which 1 per cent. was for common
labor. The tearing down cost 47 cts. For the girders and top the
erecting cost $1.83, of which 35 per cent. was common labor. The tearing
down cost 61 cts. per cubic yard. A summary would show:

                                          Girders
                      Sides     Columns     and
                       per        per     top per
                     cu. yd.    cu. yd.   cu. yd.
Framing and erecting   $4.19      $2.35    $1.83
Tearing down             .47        .47      .61
                       -----      -----    -----
  Total                $4.66      $2.82    $2.44

The greater cost of the columns forms over the girders and top was due
to the fact that the columns forms were handled almost exclusively by
the carpenters, and also in setting them great care and much time had to
be used to get them plumb and in line. The cost of the forms for the
sides was about twice as great as that for the top and girders. The
reasons for this are evident. The walls had forms on both sides, while
the top needed forming only underneath it, the area covered on the forms
being about 2,200 sq. ft. as compared to 1,000 sq. ft. The side forms
had to be set plumb and kept so. The framing was done ahead, but nearly
half of the lumber in the sides was erected as the concrete was being
put in place. The forms for the top were all put in place before any
concreting was done on the top, and the carpenters discharged. A much
larger per cent. of common labor could be used in placing forms for top
and girders than on the sides. The props were nearly all put in place
by laborers. The extra cost of tearing down the forms for the top was
due to the fact that the lumber all had to be handled one piece at a
time through a small manhole in the top, and carried about 150 ft. to be
piled.

To all the costs for forming should be added 6 cts. per cubic yard for
nails, wire and lines used on the forms.

_Concrete._--The mixtures varied for the different members. The cost of
materials was as follows:

Cement, 110 bbls. @ $1.12           $123.20
¾-in. stone, 80 cu. yds., @ $1.86    148.80
Gravel, 3 cu. yds., @ $1.33            4.00
Sand, 42 cu. yds., @ $1.20            50.40

The sides were first put in place, then the center columns were built,
following which the bottom was placed. Then the forms were erected for
the top and the girders, and these cast. In building the sides, one side
and half of the two ends were built at one time, and then forms erected
for the other half of the sides. For the sides the mixing was done in
the bottom of the reservoir. For the rest of the structure it was done
on the ground, the mixing board being along side of the reservoir. The
labor cost of the concrete work for the various members and the average
per cubic yard was as follows:

                                   Columns
                                     and
                           Sides.  Footings.  Bottom.  Girders.  Top.  Average.
Cubic yards                 22.6     10.3      19.1      11      20.0    83.
Preparing and cleaning up  $0.166   $0.060             $0.095           $0.065
Handling materials          1.022     .306    $0.070     .198   $0.187    .404
Cleaning out forms           .040                        .070     .053    .032
Mixing and placing          1.542     .728      .353     .792    1.080    .952
Ramming                     1.090     .540      .455     .450     .597    .673
Handling steel               .890     .020               .395     .083    .324
                           ------   ------    ------   ------   ------  ------
Total                      $4.750   $1.654    $0.878   $2.000   $2.000  $2.450

The total cost of labor was $203.35. The mixing was done entirely by
hand. Some plastering was done to the walls after the forms were taken
off, and the sides and bottom were washed with a brush with cement and
water. The plastering cost $6.60, including a barrel of cement and the
washing or grouting, two coats, cost $9.10, including a barrel of
cement. This added a cost of 19 cts. per cubic yard to the concrete
work, making the total cost per cubic yard $2.65.

It was a mistake to have mixed the concrete for the sides in the bottom
of the reservoir, as it made two handlings of the materials and
compelled all the concrete to be raised by hand to place it in the
forms. This accounts for the high cost of these two items.

The handling of the steel was high for the side walls, as it was all
separated and put into piles for the different panels and members in
getting it out of the pile for the sides. The rammers not only rammed
the concrete but they also bent down the prongs of the steel to get them
in place in the narrow forms, and afterwards had to pull out these
prongs. This had to be done for every piece of steel used, and readily
doubled the cost of ramming. The high cost of ramming the top was caused
by the fact that the 6 ins. of concrete had to be placed in three layers
and each rammed. The steel handling was high on account of the prongs
entangling the pieces with others, making them hard to handle. The cost
of handling steel per ton was about $4, or 0.2 ct. per pound. The steel
was all handled by common laborers.

The stock piles of material had to be made along a street and alley and
thus caused the material to be handled in wheelbarrow several hundred
feet.

The preparing to mix concrete, the cleaning up afterwards and the
cleaning out of forms are items that are seldom kept separate from the
others.

The cost of mixing and placing is high, owing to the fact that working
space was small and the mixers had to wait until the concrete was taken
off the board and placed in the forms before starting another batch.
This also meant an increased cost in the ramming, as the rammers were
idle some time waiting for a new batch to be mixed.

The total cost of concrete, including labor and materials, per cubic
yard on a basis of the 83 cu. yds. was:

                               Per cu. yd.

Cement, 1-1/3 bbls., @ $1.12     $ 1.49
Stone, 1 cu. yd.                   1.86
Sand ½ cu. yd.                      .60
Steel                              4.76
Forms, 100 ft. B. M., @ $18.30     1.85
Labor on forms                     2.41
Labor on concrete and steel        2.65
                                 ------
  Total                          $15.62

The cost of a foreman is not included in this, as the contractor looked
after the men himself.

_Waterproofing._--The waterproofing of the structure proved a serious
problem. It was thought at first that the concrete itself would be
nearly water tight, but the tank leaked like a sieve. After considering
several methods, an agent of a European waterproofing mixture prevailed
upon those interested to try his compound. To apply it, the walls had to
be dry, so a large coal burning stove was put in the reservoir and a
fire kept up day and night. While this drying process was going on
several light falls of snow occurred, and this had to be cleared away to
make the walls and roof dry. Two coats of the mixture were applied
according to the agent's instructions, and the reservoir was tested. The
water fell nearly half a foot in an hour's time.

Then a waterproofing contractor agreed to make the reservoir water tight
with paper and tar, by applying it on the inside. Three thicknesses of
paper were laid on the bottom and run well up on the sides, each layer
of paper being well covered with a preparation of tar. Upon testing it,
it was found that the leaking had been reduced about 50 per cent. A
preparation of asphalt was then placed over this, but upon a third test
the tank still leaked. As the sub-contractor had verbally agreed to make
it water tight for $125, only this amount was paid him. After this last
test he refused to do any more work.

After these attempts the sides of the reservoir were exposed on the
outside by excavating around it, and a one-brick-wall built up a few
inches from the concrete. This space was filled in with rich cement
mortar and the ground once more filled in around the structure. This
work and the materials used in it cost $1,240. Upon a fourth test the
reservoir was found to be water tight. Thus more than a third of the
cost of the entire work was in waterproofing the structure, and this
made the contract a money losing one, as this heavy cost was not
anticipated.

Several items of miscellaneous work are listed in the total cost of the
reservoir, such as filling in and puddling around reservoir and
replacing cobble paving. The top of the structure was used as a bin for
the storage of coal. For this purpose eight I-beams were embedded in
concrete around the top to be used as posts for the sides of the bin.
The cost of placing these is given.

_Total Cost._--The cost of the structure without any profits was:

579 cu. yds. excavation @ $.896                 $ 529.65
Steel                                             395.00
Crushed stone                                     148.80
Gravel                                              4.00
Sand                                               50.40
Cement                                            123.20
Lumber                                            153.60
Labor on forms                                    200.09
Labor on concrete                                 203.35
Plastering                                          6.60
Sides and bottom                                    9.10
Nails, wire, etc.                                   4.98
Bailing water                                      21.19
Building temporary fence                            1.65
Extra excavation for forms, footings, etc.         13.90
Setting I-beams in concrete                        17.65
Filling in and pudding around reservoir            34.47
Replacing cobble paving                             4.30
Hauling tools                                       3.60
Heating reservoir and handling snow                14.50
Waterproof mixture                                 29.00
Labor applying it                                   9.74
Applying paper and tar, labor and materials       125.00
Labor and materials of final waterproofing      1,240.00
Tools                                              48.75
General expense                                   210.00
                                               ---------
  Total                                        $3,602.52

~COVERED RESERVOIR, AT FORT MEADE, SOUTH DAKOTA.~--The following account
of the method and cost of constructing a 500,000-gallon reservoir is
compiled from information furnished by Mr. Samuel H. Lea, M. Am. Soc. C.
E. As shown by Fig. 277, the reservoir consists of two equal
compartments, each 50×60 ft. inside dimensions, with rounded corners.
Both compartments are covered with a 3-in. slab roof carried on the
walls and interior columns.

The concrete was a 1-2-4 Portland cement, sand and broken stone mixture,
mixed by hand on a movable platform. A concrete gang consisted of four
men who were each paid $2.75 per day. They wheeled the materials from
the supply piles to the mixing platform, mixed the concrete and
deposited it in place. During the construction of the footings and floor
two concrete gangs were employed, but after the walls were started, one
gang only was required for concrete work; the other gang was then put to
work assisting the carpenters.

[Illustration: Fig. 277.--Reservoir at Ft. Meade, S. D.]

The sand and stone were wheeled to the platform in iron wheelbarrows of
2½ cu. ft. capacity. The cement was in ¼-bbl. sacks and each sack was
taken as 1 cu. ft. Each batch of concrete contained the following
quantity of material:

2½ sacks of cement          2½ cu. ft.
2 wheelbarrows of sand        5 cu. ft.
4 wheelbarrows of stone     10 cu. ft.

The quantities of sand and stone were adjusted so as to form the proper
proportion for making a dense concrete. From time to time, as the work
progressed, experiments were made to determine the percentage of voids
both in the sand and the crushed stone; and, in this way, uniformity in
composition was secured. The mixture was made quite wet in order to
insure a free flow around the reinforcing bars. On account of the narrow
space inside the forms and the number of reinforcing bars therein care
was taken to cause the mixture to be well distributed throughout. The
wet concrete was well spaded in an effort to secure a smooth surface
next to the forms. This was generally accomplished, but some rough
places which showed after the removal of the forms required patching up.

In constructing the footings some concrete was first deposited in place
and the metal reinforcement was embedded therein. For the floor
reinforcement the lower bars were carefully embedded in the concrete
after it had been brought to a suitable height; the upper bars were then
placed crosswise upon the lower ones and kept in position until the
remainder of the concrete had been deposited around and over them. In
the wall footings a depression or groove, several inches deep, was left
under the wall space for its entire length. This ensured a good bond
between the wall proper and the footing.

The concrete floor in each compartment was built in one continuous
operation, the object being to secure a practically monolithic
construction. The lower reinforcing bars in the floor were embedded at
the proper depth in the fresh concrete and the upper bars were then
placed crosswise upon the lower ones; the two sets were then wired
together at a sufficient number of places to prevent displacement while
the remaining concrete was being deposited around and over them.

The reinforcement for the walls and columns was erected in place upon
the footings and formed a steel skeleton around which the forms were
erected. The upright bars in the walls were held together and at the
proper distance apart by means of templates consisting of wooden strips
in which holes were bored at suitable intervals to receive the bars. The
templates were maintained in a horizontal position and were moved upward
as the concrete advanced in height. The horizontal reinforcing bars
were wired in place to the upright bars; they were placed in position
ahead of the concreting as the wall was built up.

The corrugated bars in beam and girders were placed in position in the
forms and held up by blocks which were removed as the forms were filled
with concrete. The expanded metal reinforcement for the roof slab was
placed so as to be close to the lower face of the slab, but far enough
up to be entirely enveloped in the concrete.

The wall forms were made of 2-in. planks, surfaced on the inner side and
placed horizontally on edge. They were held in place by 4×4-in. posts
spaced at intervals of about 4 ft., in pairs on opposite sides of the
wall. The posts were firmly braced on the outside; they were prevented
from spreading by connecting wires passing through the wall space
between the edges of adjacent planks. At the rounded corners of the
reservoir the pairs of posts were spaced about two feet apart and the
curve was made by springing thin boards into place to fit the curve and
nailing them to the posts. The posts were high enough to reach to the
top of the wall; the siding was built up one plank at a time as the
concrete work progressed. Column forms were made of 2-in. planks on end,
extending from floor to girder. Three sides were enclosed and one side
was left open to receive the concrete; this side was closed up as the
concreting advanced in height.

The beam and girder forms were open troughs of the required dimensions,
made of 2-in. plank, surfaced on inner faces. The form of centering for
the roof slab consisted of a smooth, tight floor of 2-in. planks,
extending between the open tops of column, beam and girder forms over
the entire area between enclosing walls of the reservoir. The centering
and the beam and girder forms were supported by 6×6-in. posts resting
upon the floor below.

The regular carpenter gang consisted of a foreman carpenter at $5 per
day, a carpenter at $3.50 per day, and two helpers at $2.75 per day.
During the early concrete work of making footings and floor, where forms
were not required, the carpenter force was employed in erecting the
steel skeleton for the walls. The upright bars were placed in position
and secured by temporary wooden stays extending from the upper portion
of bars to the surface of ground outside of excavation. These stays were
removed after concreting had advanced to a sufficient height to hold the
steel securely in place.

The wages paid the concrete gang which mixed and placed all the concrete
and the carpenter gang which constructed and erected the forms and
placed the reinforcement have been given above. The costs of
construction materials on the site were:

Cement, per barrel            $2.57
Sand, per cu. yd.              1.80
Stone, per cu. yd.             3.15
Lumber, per M. ft. B. M.      27.50

The quantities in the completed concrete structure were as follows:

Total volume of concrete in reservoir                   704.71 cu. yds.
Total volume of steel reinforcement in reservoir.         5.57 cu. yds.
                                                        ------
Total volume of material in completed structure.        710.28 cu. yds.

The steel was, therefore, about 0.8%.

Volume of material in structure exclusive of roof slab     648.35 cu. yds.
Volume of material in roof slab                             61.93 cu. yds.
                                                           ------
  Total                                                    710.28 cu. yds.

The cost of the structure per cubic yard of concrete, exclusive of the
roof slab, was as follows:

  Item.                          Per cu. yd.
Crushed stone                        $ 3.168
Sand                                    .842
Cement                                 3.859
Reinforcement                          4.959
Labor, mixing and placing concrete     1.721
Forms, labor and material              2.960
                                     -------
  Total                              $17.509

In constructing the roof slab the expanded metal reinforcement raised
the unit cost. For this portion of the work the costs were:

  Item.                        Per cu. yd.
Expanded metal reinforcement    $ 5.241
Other items, same as above       12.550
                                -------
Total                           $17.791

The floor and the inside surface of reservoir walls were covered with a
coating of cement mortar composed of one part Portland cement and one
part sand. The wall plastering was from ½ in. to ¾ in. thick; it was
applied in two coats. The floor finish was laid in alternate strips
about 1 in. thick and 3 ft. wide. After the strips first laid had
hardened the remaining strips were laid, the edges being grouted to
ensure tight joints.

The outside of walls and roof was covered with a coating of tar which
was heated in an open kettle to a temperature of about 360º F. and then
applied with a brush or mop.

The cost of wall and floor plastering was 44.4 cts. per square yard,
itemized as follows:

Cement      26.4 cts.
Sand         2.6 cts.
Labor       15.4 cts.
            -----
  Total     44.4 cts.

The cost of outside waterproofing was 4 cts. per square yard,
distributed as follows:

Material    2.5 cts.
Labor       1.5 cts
            ---
  Total     4.0 cts.

While some of the cost items are apparently high when compared with the
cost of similar work in other places, it should be remembered that the
isolated locality and the local conditions were unfavorable for low
cost. Owing to the isolated location of the reservoir with respect to
large markets and also to local sources of supply the cost of material
and labor was quite high. All construction material, except some of the
stone for crushing, had to be hauled over a mountain road from 3 to 4
miles to the top of the hill selected for the reservoir site. Labor was
scarce and commanded a wage of $2.50 per day for ordinary work; the
laborers mixing concrete were paid $2.75 per day. Another source of much
relative expense was the high cost of lumber and carpenter work on the
forms. On account of the thinness of the walls and roof, the cost of
lumber and labor required per cubic yard of concrete was considerable. A
part of the lumber was used the second time in forms, but it was found
impracticable to delay the work by waiting for the concrete to harden
before beginning the new portions of the walls. This lumber was sold
after the completion of the work, but the salvage was inconsiderable,
amounting to less than 10 per cent. of the original cost.

[Illustration: Fig. 278.--Reservoir Forms. Bloomington, Ill.]

~CIRCULAR RESERVOIR, BLOOMINGTON, ILL.~--An open circular reinforced
concrete reservoir was constructed in 1905-6 for the water-works of
Bloomington, Ill. This reservoir is 300 ft. in diameter, 15 ft. deep at
the circular wall and 25 ft. deep at the center of the spherical bottom.
The wall construction is shown clearly by Fig. 278, and the floor is a
6-in. spherical slab reinforced by a mat of ¼-in. round rods placed 6
ins. on centers in both directions. The wall reinforcement is corrugated
bars. Neither the wall nor the bottom has expansion joints.

_Concrete._--The specifications required not less than 1 part Portland
cement to 2 parts sand and 5 parts clean gravel, and stipulated that
there should always be more than enough cement to fill the voids in the
sand more than enough mortar to fill the voids in the gravel. The
proportions were varied, depending on the character of the available
material and on the location the concrete was to occupy. The
stipulations regarding the minimum quantities of cement and mortar were,
however, always at least fulfilled. A 1-3-4 mixture of cement, broken
stone and gravel was largely used in the footing and wall. The gravel
was fine and contained 40 to 50% of sand; the broken stone was the
crusher-run, with the dust screened out, and the maximum-sized pieces
not larger than those which would pass a 2-in. screen. The mortar facing
on the front face of the wall was made of 1 part cement to 4 parts fine
gravel, containing sand. Some gravel from the excavation was used in the
concrete for the floor. This gravel was so fine that about one-quarter
of it was replaced with broken stone and the mixture made 1-6. Both
faces of the wall were painted with a 1-1 mixture of cement and sand;
the inner face was also painted with a 1-1 mixture of waterproof Star
Stettin Portland cement and sand. The sidewalk finish on the surface of
the floor consisted of 1-1½ mortar.

_Mixing and Handling._--The concrete mixing plant was set up outside of
the site of the reservoir along a side track from the railroad. The
concrete materials were delivered on the side track, except some gravel
from the excavation that was used. A Foote portable continuous mixer was
used in making the concrete for the wall footings and the wall. It was
mounted so it could discharge into dump cars on a service track laid on
the ground. A double hopper was built up over the mixer, one compartment
for sand and one for broken stone. The end of a service track leading
from the side track was laid on an inclined trestle up to a floor level
with the top of this double hopper, the materials being hauled in dump
cars from the side track to the hopper. The service track from the mixer
extended entirely around the wall, and 10 ft. from it, on the
embankment made there with earth from the trench for the wall-footing.
The concrete was dumped from the cars on the service track to portable
shoveling platforms near the point where work on the wall was in
progress. It was shoveled by hand from these platforms to place in the
forms as the presence of the reinforcement bars in the narrow forms
precluded dumping in large quantities. The footing was built without
forms up to the right-angle joint between it and the base of the wall at
the front, and to the top of the 45° slope on its rear face. A layer of
concrete 2.5 in. thick was first placed in the completed trench. The
reinforcement bars near the bottom were then laid on this green
concrete, the vertical bars near the front face of the wall usually
being erected at the same time. The concrete in the toe of the footing
and in the footing proper up to the top layer of reinforcement was then
laid. After the top layer of reinforcing bars had been laid, the footing
was completed, except for a top layer about 2 ins. thick at the base of
the front face of the wall and 15 ins. thick at the toe of the footing.
This left a strip of surface about 6 ft. wide, sloping at about 1 in 6
from the wall toward the center of the reservoir, and furnished the
widest and best possible bond for the joint which had to be made when
floor was laid.

_Location and Construction of Forms and Wall._--The design of the wall
of the reservoir, although simple in itself, required unusually accurate
work in the location and construction of the forms for it. The location
was made with very little difficulty, however, by an arrangement devised
by the contractor which enabled the foreman, without the aid of an
engineer, to set the necessary grade and reference stakes. A post, 10
ins. in diameter, was set very accurately and firmly in the ground at
the center of the reservoir. This post was sawed off squarely on top so
that the line of collimation of an engineer's transit set on it without
a tripod would be exactly at the grade of the top of the completed wall
of the reservoir. A 200-ft. steel tape was used to measure the radial
distance from a nail in the center post to the posts of the back, or
outside forms for the wall. In the form for the back face of the wall
2×6-in. posts, spaced one one-hundredth of the circumference apart, were
set considerably in advance of any concrete work, and were made the
basis of all measurement in building the forms. The forms as originally
planned are shown in Fig. 278.

The wall, when started, was built continuously in both directions from
the starting point. The back forms consisted of planks for lagging
nailed to vertical posts, which were accurately set and firmly braced.
The front forms were made in lengths equal to one one-hundredth of the
circumference of the reservoir, and when set up were fastened to the
back forms. Twenty-one of these front form sections were built and all
set up at once. Concrete was filled in between the front and back forms,
starting at the central form, and was rammed in inclined layers,
sloping, at about 1 on 6, both ways towards the end forms. This method
was adopted in order that the concrete might be laid continuously and
without joints. The lagging of 1-in. boards on the vertical portion of
the sections was nailed to the vertical posts, and was carried up just
ahead of the concrete filling.

When the concrete had reached the top of the central one of the 21
sections of the forms, and the concrete in that section had set
sufficiently, the section was broken up and removed, leaving two sets of
10 sections of the forms. Subsequently the other forms could be removed
in turn as desired without being broken up. As the filling-in proceeded
between the two sets of 10 forms each, the form in each set nearest the
starting point was removed, carried forward, and put in place at the
other end of its set of forms. Twelve men were required to take down and
transport one of the front form sections.

In setting up a front form, its inner toe was firmly supported by a
stake driven into the ground and by the horizontal board, nailed
transversely under the bottom 4×4-in. horizontal stringers, which rested
on the ground. The upper part of the form was then securely fastened to
the 2×6-in. posts of the back forms by temporary wooden connecting
strips, which were removed as the concrete filling was carried up. The
sections of the front forms were also securely tied to each other.

A facing of gravel concrete, rich in cement and with no pebbles larger
than ½-in. was placed on the front face of the wall, extending from the
back edges of the vertical reinforcing bars to the surface. A sheet-iron
plate, about 8 ins. wide by 5 ft. long, was placed vertically just back
of those bars. The concrete was shoveled in loose to the top of these
iron plates, and then the mortar was poured in between the latter and
the front face forms from buckets. The iron plates were next drawn by
handles attached to them, and the mortar and concrete tamped together
before either had set. In making joints, the old concrete surfaces were
always brushed and wet down, and, if necessary slushed with a grout of
neat cement before new concrete was laid on them.

_Construction of Floor._--The excavation over the site of the reservoir
floor was brought accurately to grade 6 ins. below the surface of the
finished concrete by hand after the scoop-bucket excavator had passed
over. In making the excavation the levels were given on radial lines
drawn from the ends of the 10-ft. sections of the wall to the center. A
rod, on which the elevations of the sub-grade at every 10 ft. from the
wall to the center of the reservoir were clearly marked, was used in
connection with a transit on the center post in locating the elevations
of different points in the reservoir floor. By using this method the
elevations required were easily found by the foreman in charge without
the assistance of an engineer. When the work approached the center, the
post was removed and the transit was placed on a portable pedestal which
was set on points of known elevation on the finished concrete.

The slanting surface left on the top of the footing inside the wall
formed, together with the projecting reinforcement rods, an excellent
bond between the concrete of the wall and that of the floor, when the
latter was laid. A circular strip of the floor, 16 ft. wide, was put
down next to the wall first, and the remainder of the floor was laid
according to the progress of the excavation. The lower 3½ ins, of the
concrete was usually first spread out over an area 12 or 16 ft. square,
then the reinforcement was placed, and after that the top 2 ins. of
concrete and a ½-in. sidewalk finish surface were laid.

[Illustration: Fig. 279.--Standpipe at Haverhill, Mass.]

The ¼-in. rods in the bottom are 6-ins. on centers in both directions.
They were in 12 and 16-ft. lengths and were partly woven together in
mats before being placed. The rods in one direction were all laid out
and woven with four or five of those in the other direction, the joints
being tied with small wire. The remaining cross rods were laid after the
mat had been placed. The mats were overlapped 1 ft. This method of
placing proved economical and efficient, giving at the same time
something permanent on which to lay the remaining concrete.

~STANDPIPE AT ATTLEBOROUGH, MASS.~--The stand pipe was 50 ft. in diameter
and 106 ft. high inside, with walls 18 ins. thick at the bottom and 8
ins. thick at the top. Figure 279 shows the general arrangement of the
reinforcement. Round bars of 0.4 carbon steel were used; the bars came
in 56½-ft. lengths, so that three lengths with laps of 30 ins., made a
complete ring around the tank. The concrete was a 1-2-4 mixture of ¼ to
1½-in. broken stone with screenings used as portion of sand.

The floor was built first, and on it was erected a tower to a height of
60 ft. and a derrick with a 40-ft. boom was set on its top. The derrick
was operated by an engine on the ground which also had a revolving gear
attached. When the work had reached the top of this tower, the tower was
raised to 110 ft. in height and the derrick shifted to the new
elevation. The forms were convex and concave sections 7½ ft. high and
about 11 ft. long. The concave or outside forms were made in 16 panels,
with horizontal ribs and vertical lagging; two complete rings of panels
were used. The panels were joined into a ring by clamps across the
joints, this clamping action and the friction of the concrete holding
them in place. The inside forms consisted of vertical ribs carrying
horizontal lagging put in place a piece at a time as the filling
proceeded. They were supported by staging from the derrick tower. The
remaining plant comprised a Sturtevant roll jaw crusher feeding to
screens which discharged fines below ¼-in. into one bin, medium stone
into another bin and coarse stone into a third bin. These bins fed to
the measuring hopper of a Smith mixer, which discharged into the derrick
bucket.

The mode of procedure was as follows: The reinforcing rings were erected
to a height of 7½ ft. The bars were bent by being pulled through a tire
binder and around a curved templet by a steam engine. The bending gave
some trouble, due, it was thought, to the stiffness of the high carbon
steel. Vertical channels 4 ins. deep were set with webs in radial planes
or across wall at four points in the circumference. The flanges of these
channels were punched exactly to the vertical spacing of the reinforcing
rings. Through the punched holes were passed short bars on the opposite
ends of which the reinforcing rings were supported and wired. The three
sections of rod of which each ring was composed, were lapped 30 ins. and
connected by Crosby clips. Considerable difficulty was had in holding
the reinforcing rings in line by the method employed; it is stated by
the engineer that a greater number than four channels would have been
much better.

The reinforcement being in place, an inside and an outside ring of forms
was erected. Concreting was then carried on simultaneously from four
points on the circumference and a ring 7½ ft. high was concreted in one
operation. Several facts were brought out in the concreting; careful and
conscientious spading was necessary to get a smooth dense surface; a too
wet mixture allowed the stone to settle and segregate; care was
necessary in this thin wall containing two rings of bars to keep the
stone from wedging among and around the bars and thus causing voids. The
engineer states that for this reason the substitution of mortar for
concrete in tank walls is worth considering. He estimates that in this
work, costing $35,000, that the use of a 1-2 mortar in place of the
1-2-4 concrete would have increased the cost by $2,300, a 1-2½ mortar by
$1,500, and a 1-3 mortar by $750. It was also found that there was
danger from a movement of the reinforcement in the concrete and of the
forms in placing the concrete.

When a ring of wall 7½ ft. high had been concreted, the reinforcement
was placed as before described for another ring. The two rings of forms
below those just filled were removed from the wall, hoisted up and set
in place on top. These two operations of placing reinforcement and
setting forms for another ring of wall took three days, so that the top
surface of the wall to which new concrete was to be added, had become
hard. This hard surface was very thoroughly washed and then coated with
neat cement immediately before depositing the fresh concrete. Water was
admitted to the tank as the work progressed, being kept about 20 ft.
below the work in progress. Numerous small leaks developed, but only two
were large enough for the water to squirt beyond the face of the wall.
These leaks appeared to grow smaller as time went on. To do away with
them entirely, the inside wall was plastered. The first coat of plaster
was not successful in stopping the leaks, so the standpipe was emptied
and replastered, five coats being used in the lower 20 ft. This did not
serve so resort was had to a Sylvester wash. A boiling hot solution of
12 ozs. to the gallon of water of pure olive oil castile soap was
applied to the dry wall. In 24 hours this was followed with a 2 ozs. to
the gallon solution of alum applied at normal temperature. Four coats of
each solution were applied, which reduced the leakage to a small amount.
To do away with all leakage another four-coat application of Sylvester
wash was used.

Details of the cost of the work are not available. There were 770 cu.
yds. of concrete in the walls and 185 tons of steel bars. Altogether
3,000 Crosby clips, costing $1,100 were used. The cost of the concrete
in place was about as follows:

Cement, per cu. yd. of concrete          $ 4.80
Sand and stone, per cu. yd. of concrete    3.90
Mixing, per cu. yd. of concrete            0.40
Placing, per cu. yd. of concrete           2.20
Forms, per cu. yd. of concrete             2.65
                                         ------
  Total per cu. yd. of concrete          $13.95

~GAS HOLDER TANK, DES MOINES, IOWA.~--The tank was 84 ft. in diameter and
21 ft. 5 ins. deep. It had a horizontal floor 16 ins. thick 5 ft. below
ground level and a wall 21 ft. high, 18 ins. thick at base and 12 ins.
thick at top under coping and with alternate pilasters and piers around
the outside. The concrete for the floor was a 1-2½-5 2-in. stone mixture
and the concrete for the walls was a 1-2-4 1-in. stone mixture. The
floor was constructed first, with a circular channel for the wall
footing, and then the wall was constructed.

Piles were driven in the bottom and their heads cut to level and filled
around with tamped cinders. Two circumferential rows of posts were
driven around the edge so that a pair of posts, one inner and one outer,
came on each radius through a wall pilaster or pier. These posts served
primarily to carry the frames for the wall forms and secondarily for
holding the forms for the circular wall footing channel as shown by the
sketch Fig. 280. The floor concrete was put in in diamond-shaped panels
between forms, whose top edges were set to floor level. Each form was
designed to make a groove in the edge of the slab so that adjacent slabs
would bond with it. The concrete was wheeled to place in barrows,
thoroughly tamped, roughly floated to surface and finally given a trowel
finish.

[Illustration: Fig. 280.--Forms for Constructing Channel for Wall in
Reservoir Floor.]

To construct the walls, the posts before mentioned, were cut off to
exact level 6 ins. above the finished floor. A bent for the wall forms
was then erected on each radial pair as shown by Fig. 281. The bents
were erected by hand and carefully plumbed and lined up, both radially
and circumferentially. The pier and pilaster forms were then erected
across wall opposite each bent as shown by Fig. 281. The forms for the
wall between pilasters and piers consisted of panels 4 ft. high.

[Illustration: Fig. 281.--Frame for Forms for Circular Reservoir Wall.]

[Illustration: Fig. 282.--Form Panels for Circular Reservoir Wall.]

A panel for the inner face of the wall is shown by Fig. 282, the panel
for the outer face was similar in construction but was, of course,
concave instead of convex. Enough panels of each kind were made to reach
entirely around the tank. The inside panels were bolted at the ends to
the uprights of the bents; the outside panels were similarly lag screwed
to the uprights of the pier and pilaster forms; Fig. 281 shows the holes
for bolts and lag screws. The spaces between ends of inside panels in
front of the bents was closed by a ½×6-in. steel plate the full height
of the wall; this plate was bolted to the bents and had anchor bolts
every 3 ft., reaching into the wall. This anchoring of the plate to the
wall permitted the diagonal bracing of the bents to be removed to allow
runways to be laid on the cross-pieces, since the plate held firmly the
bent post to which it was bolted as indicated by Fig. 283. A complete
circle of inside and outside forms was erected and filled, then the
forms were raised 3 ft. by block and tackle from cross timbers across
wall between bent and pilaster form, and this depth concreted and the
forms raised again. The forms were oiled on the faces coming against the
concrete. It took about half a day to raise and set a complete circle of
forms. The concrete was mixed outside the tank and was wheeled up
inclines and dumped onto runways laid on the cross pieces of the bents
and then loaded and wheeled to place. The runway was raised to
successive horizontals as the work progressed.

[Illustration: Fig. 283.--Sketch Showing Filler for Joint Between Form
Panels.]

Only a few general cost figures are available. The labor for mixing and
placing concrete was as follows:

For floor, per cu. yd.      3.4 hrs.
For walls, per cu. yd.      5.2 hrs.
For cornice, per cu. yd.    5.4 hrs.

The cost of unloading the reinforcing steel from cars and placing it in
the structure was $7 per ton, or 0.35 ct. per lb. The cost of form
lumber, framing, erecting and taking down forms was 9 cts. per square
foot of wall covered.

~GAS HOLDER TANK, NEW YORK CITY.~--The tank for the Central Union Gas
Co.'s gas holder at 136th St. and Locust Ave. has an interior diameter
of 189 ft. and a depth of 41 ft. 6 ins. The exterior wall is 42 ft. 6
ins. deep, 5 ft. 6 ins. thick at the base and 4 ft. 6 ins. thick at the
top; concentric with it and 11 ft. 6 in. away is the interior wall 166
ft. in external diameter and 16 ft. 6 ins. high with a uniform
thickness of 2 ft. 6 ins. The bottom of the tank enclosed by the
interior wall is a truncated cone whose base is at the level of the wall
top. Fig. 284 shows the arrangement.

It was specified that the diameter of this tank should not vary more
than 2 ins. and that the exterior wall should not vary more than 1 in.
from the vertical. The main form was a circular drum whose exterior face
formed the inner face of the main wall. Its framework consisted of 40
vertical trusses or radial frames 6 ft. deep and 42 ft. high set
equidistant around the tank, these trusses being braced together on both
edges by circumferential timbers. Radial horizontal pieces nailed across
the radial frames and projecting beyond their faces carried vertical
iron guide strips against which the movable panels of lagging were
seated. These panels were cylindrical segments 5 ft. high and long
enough to span between two radial frames or 14 ft. 11-5/8 ins. The
panels were adjusted radially by wedges to give 1/8 in. clearance in
respect to inner face of wall; enough of them were made to form a
complete circle and they were set with 1-in. clearance between vertical
edges of adjacent panels to allow for swelling when wetted.

[Illustration: Fig. 284.--Section of Gas Holder Tank, New York City.]

The concrete bottom of the annular space between walls was first
constructed. On this floor were set 6×6-in.×8-ft. sills for the radial
frames; these were located accurately by transit. The radial frames were
then set on the sills by a derrick, adjusted to exact radial position by
a measuring wire swiveled to the center point of the tank and plumbed
by transit. A complete circle of lagging panels was then adjusted to the
frames at the bottom of the trench. For concreting, the wall was divided
circumferentially into three sections. These sections were separately
concreted to the top of the lagging panels, that is to a height of 5 ft.
After the concrete had set 48 hours the panels were hoisted 4 ft., so
that their lower edges still overlapped the concrete 12 ins., and
another ring of wall was concreted. This procedure was repeated until
the wall was completed. The back of the wall was formed against the side
of the trench where possible and in other places against rough board
lagging held in position in any convenient way.

For handling the concrete, four equidistant panels of the form framework
were converted into double compartment elevator shafts providing for two
balanced cars controlled by a sheave provided with a friction brake.
Three mixers supplied concrete to these elevators. Considering a single
elevator, two barrows of concrete were wheeled from the mixer onto the
car at the top of the elevator frame, the friction brake was released
and the loaded car descended to the work hoisting at the same time its
twin car loaded with two empty barrows. The elevators distributed to
wheeling platforms cantilevered out from the outer face of the framework
and located successively 5 ft., 15 ft., 20 ft., etc., above the bottom
of the trench. On these platforms the concrete was distributed as
required, the maximum wheeling distance being never over one-eighth the
circumference of the tank. The concrete was mixed very wet and deposited
in 6-in. layers.

The inner and outer surfaces of the wall were both painted with two
coats of stiff cement grout neat, and in addition the inner surface was
rubbed smooth by carborundum brick. Regarding this finishing work Mr.
Howard Bruce, Engineer of Construction, writes:

"The scouring was done on each section of the wall immediately after the
forms supporting these sections had been removed. The object was to rub
this interior surface with carborundum before the surface of the
concrete had taken its final set. By rubbing the concrete at this stage
and at the same time applying with a brush a coating of neat cement
grout, we believe the face of the concrete was made more or less
impermeable, as examination shows the pores of the concrete are very
largely filled up. We have no accurate figures as to the cost per square
yard of this treatment, but one can readily see that this cost would be
insignificant as compared with the possible improvement of the work. The
carborundum brick was selected on account of its hardness. I believe
practically any stone would answer the same purpose. In addition to
filling the pores of the concrete, this treatment gives the surface a
good smooth finish."


~LINING A RESERVOIR, QUINCY, MASS.~--The following methods and costs are
given by Mr. C. M. Saville, M. Am. Soc. C. E., for lining the Forbes
Hill Reservoir at Quincy, Mass. This reservoir is 100×280 ft. on the
floor, with side slopes of 1 on 1.75, and was built by contract in
1900-1901.

[Illustration: Fig. 285.--Section of Reservoir Lining, Quincy, Mass.]

Figure 285 is a section of the concrete lining; the bottom layer for the
floor was a 1-2-5 natural cement concrete, and for the sides a 1-2½-6½
Portland cement concrete; the top layer on both floor and sides was a
1-2½-4 Portland cement concrete; 2½-in. stone was the maximum size
allowed in any concrete and 1½-in. the maximum allowed in the top layer.
Smaller stone was used for special surface work, as noted further on.
The stone was cobbles turned up in the excavation work and had to be
gathered from scattered piles and washed before crushing. A 9×15 Farrel
crusher, operated by a 12 HP. engine did the crushing; it was rated at
125 tons a day, but averaged only about 40 tons. The fine dust was
screened out and the remainder discharged into a 30-cu. yd.,
three-compartment bin, one compartment for stone less than 1½ ins.,
another for 1½ to 2½-in. stone and a third for returns. The stone had 46
per cent. voids and weighed 95 lbs. per cu. ft. The sand was of
excellent quality. Atlas and Beach's Portland and Hoffman natural cement
were used.

All concrete was mixed and placed by hand, the concrete gang consisting
generally of 1 sub-foreman, 2 men measuring materials, 2 men mixing
mortar, 3 men turning concrete three times, 3 men wheeling concrete, 1
man placing concrete and 2 men ramming concrete. Two gangs were
ordinarily employed, each mixing and placing about 20 cu. yds. per day,
or 1.43 cu. yds. per man per day. The materials (sand and stone) were
measured in bottomless boxes, the following sizes being used:

                     --Sand Box--                --Stone Box--

Prop. of Mix.    Size.      Vol. cu. ft.       Size.     Vol. cu. ft.

1-2½-4[H]      2'9"×2'×1'8"       9.25        5'×4'5½"        14.8
1-3-6[H]       2'9"×2'×2'        11.1         5'×6'8"         22.2
1-2-5          2'9"×2'×1'4"       7.4         5'×6'6-5/8"     18.5
1-2½-6½        2'9"×2'×1'8"       9.25        5'×7'2½"        24.05

[Footnote H: These mixtures were used for gate house and standpipe
foundation work.]

The bottom layer was placed in a continuous sheet; the top layer was
laid in 10-ft. squares on the floor and in 8×10-ft. squares on the
sides; these squares alternated in both directions, one-half being first
laid and allowed to set. In laying the sides the surface was left 1 in.
low and then before the concrete had set was brought to plane by a 1-in.
layer of 1-2½-4 mixture using stone and stone dust less than 3/8 in. The
concrete for the floor was mixed rather wet and rammed until it quaked;
on the sides a drier mixture was necessary to prevent flow. The cost of
the lining concrete was as follows:

  Bottom Layer on Floor: 1-2-5 Mixture:
1.25 bbls. natural cement at $1.08           $1.350
0.34 cu. yd. sand at $1.02                    0.347
0.86 cu. yd. stone at $1.57                   1.350
4½ ft. B. M. lumber at $20 per M.             0.090
Labor, on forms                               0.100
Labor mixing and placing                      1.170
Labor general expenses                        0.080
                                             ------
  Total                                      $4.487

  Bottom Layer on Sides: 1-2½-6½ Mixture:
1.08 bbl. Portland cement at $1.53           $1.652
0.37 cu. yd. sand at $1.02                    0.377
0.96 cu. yd. stone at $1.57                   1.507
Lumber for forms (about 1 ft. B. M.) at $20   0.016
Labor, on forms.                              0.121
Labor, mixing and placing                     1.213
Labor, general expenses                       0.177
                                             ------
  Total                                      $5.063

  Top Layer on Floor and Sides: 1-2½-4 Mixture:
1.37 bbls. Portland cement at $1.53          $2.09
0.47 cu. yd. sand at $1.02                    0.48
0.75 cu. yd. stone at $1.57                   1.17
12½ ft. B. M. form lumber at $20 per M.       0.25
Labor, on forms                               0.26
Labor, mixing and placing                     1.530
Labor, general expenses                       0.150
                                             ------
  Total                                       $5.93

The side finish with 1-2½-4 concrete of 3/8-in. stone cost $0.154 per
sq. yd. 1 in. thick. This work was done by a gang of 3 plasterers and 3
helpers.

The layer of plaster between the concrete layers was put down on 4-ft.
strips and finished similarly to the surface of a granolithic walk. This
layer consisted of 1-2 mortar finished with a 4-1 mortar. To keep the
plaster from cracking it was covered with strips of coarse burlap soaked
in water; this precaution was not entirely successful, some cracks
appeared and had to be grouted. Three gangs, each consisting of 1
plasterer and 1 helper, did the plastering, each gang laying about 700
sq. yds. per day. The cost of the plaster layer was as follows:

  Item.         Per 100 sq. ft.   Per sq. yd.   Per cu. yd.
Cement at $1.53     $1.15           $0.103        $7.42
Sand at $1.02        0.13            0.012         0.86
Burlap               0.02            0.002         0.14
Labor                0.92            0.083         6.00
                    -----           ------       ------
  Totals            $2.22           $0.200       $14.42

It will be noted that it took over 5 bbls. of cement per cubic yard, and
that the labor cost was $6 per cubic yard.

~RELINING A RESERVOIR, CHELSEA, MASS.~--The following account of relining
the Powder Horn Hill Reservoir at Chelsea, Mass., is taken from a paper
by Mr. C. M. Saville. This reservoir which holds about 1,000,000 gallons
is oval in shape, 98×175 ft. at the top, 68×148 ft. at the bottom and 15
ft. deep, with side slopes about 1 on 1. The work was done by day labor.
For sake of completeness the costs of excavation and back-filling are
given here as well as the concrete costs.

The top of the bank was too narrow to allow the use of carts and an
18-in. gage railroad was decided upon as most convenient for handling
materials. A 65-ft. boom derrick with a 70-ft. mast was used for
removing the excavated material and for depositing concrete. The derrick
was operated by a 15-h.p. double drum hoisting engine, was held in place
by six wire guy ropes, and had a reach such that only one moving was
necessary after it was placed. The engine and derrick were set up on the
floor of the reservoir, and the work of excavation was begun at about
the middle of the south side. In order to facilitate the work, a
platform supported on A frames was set up. These frames were spaced
about 15 ft. apart and rested on the bottom and slope of the reservoir,
being held in place by bolts driven into the floor.

The paving blocks on the top of the slope were removed and piled up to
be taken away. The old lining and the material excavated from the bank
were shoveled into the scale pan of the derrick, hoisted to the cars on
the top of the bank, and then run by gravity to a dump a short distance
down the hillside. Here the cars were run out on a rough trestle, the
load dumped, and the empties hauled back to the work by a rope carried
through pulleys to the winch head on the hoisting drum of the engine.

For the storage of some of the materials, two small portable storehouses
were set up--one 8×10×7 ft., the other 11×16 x 7 ft. The bulky portions,
such as cement, sand, and stone, were delivered as necessary, a few
days' supply only being kept on hand. A branch from the railroad was so
arranged that it passed the storehouses and stone piles, while the sand
was piled close to the concrete mixing board. The intention on the work
was to do nothing by hand that could possibly be done by steam, except
that all of the concrete was mixed by hand. As great a proportion of
water was used as could be done without causing the material to slide
when rammed in place.

The lower layer of concrete was of the proportion by volume of 1 cement,
2½ sand, and 6½ crushed stone (sizes from ¾ to 1½ ins.). This was rather
a lean mixture, and as it could not be rammed enough to flush all over,
the surface was finished where necessary by a thick mortar made in the
proportion of 1 cement to 6 sand, and applied with heavy brushes. Before
placing any of the concrete, the bank back of the old concrete left in
place was thoroughly rammed with iron railroad tampers, and the edge of
the old concrete was scrubbed with water and a stiff brush and then
coated with 1 to 4 grout, which was allowed to fill in the angle between
the concrete and the slope. Just before placing the concrete the earth
bank was well wet in order that moisture might not be drawn from the
concrete while it was soft.

In order to make the new lining as waterproof as possible, a layer of
asphalt was placed on top of the lower layer of concrete and brought up
on the exposed edge of the old layer at the bottom of the new work.
This, it was expected would make an elastic and watertight joint between
the new and the old work.

Venezuela asphalt, "Crystal Brand," was used, being poured upon the top
of the concrete layer and allowed to run down the slope, care being
taken that the concrete was entirely and perfectly covered. After the
first layer of asphalt was cool, a second layer was similarly applied,
and the resulting sheet was about ¼ in. thick. Any inclination to crawl
down the slope when exposed to the sun was readily stopped by throwing
on a pailful of cold water. A most particular part of this work was to
get the asphalt as hot and liquid as possible and yet not burn it. All
of the concrete was protected from the sun and kept damp by being
covered with strips of burlap, which were moistened by sprinkling.

The upper layer of concrete was composed of a much richer mixture of
concrete than that used in the bottom layer, the proportions by volume
being 1 cement, 1¼ sand, 1¼ stone dust, and 4 broken stone of the sizes
mentioned above. On account of the steep slope it was possible to do
only a little ramming, and the material was laid as wet as possible. To
make this layer more impervious and also to obtain a smooth surface, the
concrete was left about an inch below and a finish coat applied by
expert granolithic finishers. This coating was applied as soon as it was
possible to do so after the main layer was in place, but on account of
the steepness and the liability of the wet concrete to flow, care had to
be taken not to begin work too soon.

The top finishing coat was made in the proportion of 1 part cement,
1-2/3 part sand, and 3-1/3 parts stone dust. In order to help in
bonding, the last ramming on the concrete was done with rammers studded
with pieces of iron about 1 in. long and ½ in. deep.

The finishing was done in three operations: The material was spread on
the concrete and thoroughly worked into it by the finishers, using rough
wooden floats; after this it was gone over and partially smoothed down
with a thin steel float; and finally it was worked to give the finished
appearance and an impervious surface.

The under layer of concrete was placed in a continuous sheet. The upper
layer was put down in alternate strips, 10 ft, long (the whole length of
the layer) and 5 ft. wide. These blocks were built up in forms, which
were not removed until the concrete had set. Finally, the back or edge
of the block toward the bank was well wet and thoroughly plastered, to
prevent, as far as possible, the infiltration of any water. The plaster
was mixed in the proportion of 1 part cement to 4 parts sand. When the
forms were wholly removed, the space between the concrete and the bank
was refilled, to within about 6 ins. of the top, with a clayey material
previously excavated, and the space was filled and graded to the top of
the bank with loam. During the work two holidays intervened; the men
were also transported to and from the work. Charges were made for these
items, amounting to $209.77, and this sum, together with the cost of
installing the plant ($716.03) are proportionally charged against the
work as follows:

                            Per cent.   Total.   Per cu. yd.
Excavation                     70.3      $651       $2.17
Lower concrete                 12         111        1.16
Upper concrete                 15.4       143        1.11
Back fill                       2.3        21         .28

The detailed cost of repairing the reservoir lining is given in the
following tabulations:

Excavation.

                                    Rate.   Per cu. yd.
Foreman                    9 5/9 days   $4.00   $0.13
Engineman                 12 3/9 days    3.00     .12
Carpenter                  2     days    2.67     .02
Laborers                   9 6/9 days    2.25     .07
Laborers                 110 2/9 days    2.00     .73
Laborers                  46 5/9 days    1.75     .27
Derrick                   12 3/9 days    3.75     .15
Rails and cars            11 2/9 days    0.40     .02
Stove coal                  3.05 tons    6.50     .07
Egg coal                     .95 tons    6.25     .02
                                                 ----
Total, 300 cu. yds.                              1.60

Estimated proportionate charge for plant
installation and holidays                        2.17
                                                 ----
Grand total                                      3.77

Lower Layer Concrete.
                                        Rate.   Per cu. yd.
Foreman                  3-7/9 days     $4.00         $0.16
Engineer                 2-3/9 days      3.00          0.07
Carpenters               7     days      2.67          0.20
Laborers                 1-7/9 days      2.25          0.06
Laborers                89     days      2.00          1.87
Laborers                 4     days      1.75          0.07
Derrick and engine       2-3/9 days      3.75          0.08
Rails and cars           2-2/9 days      0.40          0.01
Cement                 106-3/8 bbls.     1.35          1.50
Sand                   37.4 cu. yds.     1.10          0.43
Broken stone             117.9 tons      1.35          1.67
Egg coal                   .41 tons      6.25          0.03
Lumber                    1.3 M. ft.    21.00          0.28
                                                       ----
    Total, 95.5 cu. yds.                              $6.43

Estimated proportionate charge for
plant installation and holidays                        1.16
                                                       ----
    Grand total                                       $7.59

Upper Layer Concrete.
                                        Rate.   Per cu. yd.
Foreman                   6-7/9 days    $4.00         $0.21
Engineer                  1-8/9 days     3.00          0.04
Carpenter                18-5/9 days     2.67          0.38
Laborers                  1-7/9 days     2.25          0.03
Laborers                119-5/9 days     2.00          1.85
Derrick and engine        1-8/9 days     3.75          0.05
Rails and cars            8-3/9 days     0.40          0.03
Cement                    176½ bbls.     1.35          1.86
Sand                   30.2 cu. yds.     1.10          0.26
Stone dust                 41.6 tons     1.50          0.48
Broken stone              122.8 tons     1.35          1.28
Egg coal                     .2 tons     6.25          0.00
Lumber                      4 M. ft.    21.00          0.65
Burlap                      300 yds.     0.04½         0.10
Nails                       170 lbs.     0.05          0.03
                                                       ----

    Total, 129.2 cu. yds.                             $7.25
Estimated proportionate charge for
plant installation and holidays                        1.11
                                                       ----
    Grand total                                       $8.36

Back Plaster.
                                        Rate.   Per cu. yd.
Plasterer                  3-8/9 days   $5.40        $0.08½
Plasterer                     8/9 days   6.00         0.02
Plasterer                   5-5/9 days   4.50         0.09
Laborers                    9-3/9 days   2.25         0.08½
Laborers                      3/9 days   2.00         0.00
Cement                         6 bbls.   1.35         0.03
Sand                      3.3 cu. yds.   1.10         0.01
                                                      ----
    Total, 262 sq. yds.                               0.32

Surfacing.
                                        Rate.   Per cu. yd.
Plasterer                   7-6/9 days  $5.40         $0.09
Plasterer                   2-1/9 days   6.00          0.03
Plasterer                   9-4/9 days   4.50          0.09
Laborers                   12-8/9 days   2.25          0.06
Laborers                    2-4/9 days   2.00          0.01
Cement                       22¼ bbls.   1.35          0.06
Sand                     5.07 cu. yds.   1.10          0.02
Stone dust                     14 tons   1.50          0.04
                                                       ----
    Total, 460 sq. yds.                               $0.40

Asphalt.
                                        Rate.   Per cu. yd.
Foreman                        1/9 day  $4.00        $0.00
Asphalt man                   11  days   2.00         0.05
Laborers                       6  days   2.00         0.02½
Asphalt kettle                11  days   1.50         0.03½
Asphalt                      3.9  tons  30.00         0.25
Asphalt mops                             3.00         0.01
                                                      ----
    Total, 464 sq. yds.                              $0.37

Back Filling.

                                       Rate.  Per cu. yd.
Foreman                  1-3/9 days    $4.00        $0.07
Laborers                23-3/9 days     2.00         0.62
Laborers                 9     days     1.75         0.21
Rails and cars.          2-2/9 days     0.40         0.02
Loam                    27-5/9 cu. yds. 1.25         0.46
                                                    -----
  Total, 75 cu. yds.                                $1.38

Estimated proportionate
  charge for installing plant and holidays          $0.28
                                                    -----
  Grand total                                       $1.66

Installing Plant.

                                                   Total.
Foreman                 15-4/9 days    $4.00       $61.78
Sub-foreman              1     day      3.00         3.00
Engineer                 8-4/9 days     3.00        25.33
Carpenter                3     days     2.67         8.00
Watchman                42     days     2.00        84.00
Laborers                17-4/9 days     2.25        38.36
Laborers               149-8/9 days     2.00       299.78
Double team             10½    days     5.00        52.50
Single team              6     days     2.00        12.00
Single team              1     day      3.50         3.50
Teaming (total)                                     53.00
Derrick and engine.     11-4/9 days     3.75        49.92
Rails and cars           8-2/9 days     0.40         3.29
Broken stone             7.05  tons     1.35         9.52
Egg coal                  .6   ton      6.25         3.75
Kerosene                  30   gal.     0.11         3.30
Oil                        4   gal.     0.25         1.00
Spikes                   220   lbs.     0.05        11.00
                                                  -------
  Total                                           $723.03

The cost of the concrete work in the lower and upper layers can be still
further detailed as shown below:

Lower Layer Concrete.
95.5 cu. yds., 1-2½-6½ concrete.

  Materials:                                    Rate. Per cu. yd.
Atlas cement                      1.11 bbl.     $1.35       $1.50
Sand                               .39 cu. yd.   1.10        0.43
Broken stone (.97 cu. yd.)        1.23 tons      1.35        1.66
Miscellaneous, plant, coal, etc.                             1.28

  Labor:
Mixing and placing                                          $2.09
Carpenter work on forms at $24.00 per M.                      .34
                                                            -----
  Total per cu. yd. in place                                $7.30

Upper Layer Concrete.
129.2 cu. yds., 1-1¼-1¼-4 concrete.

  Materials:                                    Rate. Per cu. yd.
Atlas cement                      1.37 bbl.     $1.35       $1.85
Sand                               .24 cu. yd.   1.10        0.26
Stone dust (.25 cu. yd.)           .32 ton       1.50        0.48
Broken stone (.75 cu. yd.)         .96 ton       1.35        1.30
Lumber                            0.31 M. ft.   21.00        0.65
Miscellaneous, plant, etc.                                   1.32

  Labor:
Mixing and placing                                           1.85
Carpenter work on forms at $21.00 per M.                     0.66
                                                            -----
  Total per cu. yd. in place                                $8.37

The following approximate labor costs are also given: Transporting,
erecting and removing derrick, $260.85. Equivalent time: Foreman, 6
days; engineer, 4 days; laborer, 85 days.

Transporting, laying and removing track, $125.03. Equivalent time:
Foreman, 4 days; laborer, 40 days.

Caring for dump and disposing of surplus by rough grading, $70.28.
Equivalent time: Foreman, 1 day; laborer, 33 days.

The total cost of the work was $3,503.66, divided up as follows:

Excavation                   $  480.79
Lower layer concrete            614.15
Upper layer concrete            937.94
Back plaster                     84.73
Surfacing                       186.04
Asphalting                      170.94
Back filling                    103.27
Installing plant                716.03
Transportation and holidays     209.77
                             ---------
  Grand total                $3,503.66

~LINING JEROME PARK RESERVOIR.~--The bottom of the reservoir that was
lined covered 250 acres, and the concrete lining was 6 ins. thick. The
lining was laid in alternate strips 16 ft. wide between forms set to
grade. The concrete was mixed in 18 Ransome mixers provided with
charging hoppers and mounted on trucks without boilers. Steam was
supplied to the mixer engines from the boilers of the contractor's
locomotives. One locomotive supplied steam for three or four mixers.
Tracks were laid in parallel lines across the reservoir bottom from 150
to 200 ft. apart. Sand and stone were hauled in on these tracks. The
sand was dumped in stock piles at intervals; the stone was shoveled from
the cars directly into the charging hopper and the sand was delivered by
wheelbarrows to the same hopper. Four men shoveled the stone for each
mixer. To deliver the concrete from the mixer to the work required six
men with wheelbarrows. Two men leveled off the concrete discharged by
the barrows and two other men floated the surface by means of a
straight-edge spanning the 16-ft. strips and riding on the forms. By
using a wet but not sloppy concrete and moving the straight-edge back
and forth a good surface was secured. The gang mixing and placing
consisted of 20 men for each mixer and 18 gangs laid approximately 1½
acres per 10-hour day. The gang organization and wages were as follows:

   Item.                                          Per 10 hours.
4 men shoveling stone at $1.50                       $ 6.00
2 men wheeling sand at $1.50                           3.00
2 men delivering cement at $1.50                       3.00
1 man dumping mixer at $1.50                           1.50
1 man tending engine and water at $1.50                1.50
6 men wheeling concrete at $1.50                       9.00
2 men spreading concrete at $1.50                      3.00
2 men leveling concrete at $1.50                       3.00
1 foreman                                              3.00
                                                     ------
      Total per day                                  $33.00

These costs do not include the fraction of a day's labor for fireman or
the cost of fuel.

~RESERVOIR FLOOR, CANTON, ILL.~--The following costs are given by Mr. G.
W. Chandler for lining the bottom of a 160×80-ft. reservoir with corners
of 20-ft. radius and vertical brick sidewalls. A 1-3½-7½ crushed stone
concrete was used; it was mixed by hand in batches of 2.7 cu. ft.
cement, 9 cu. ft. sand and 20¼ cu. ft. stone. The sand and stone were
measured separately, the sand and cement mixed dry, then shoveled into a
pile with the rock, well wetted, shoveled over again and then shoveled
into wheelbarrows. The stone had 40 per cent. voids and the sand 30 per
cent. voids. The lining was 10 ins. thick including a ¾-in. coat of 1-2¼
mortar spread and worked smooth with a trowel. The cost per cubic yard
of the lining in place was as follows:

0.856 bbl. cement at $2.50                            $2.14
10.1 bu. sand (100 lbs. per bu.) at 5¾ cts             0.58
0.857 cu-yd-stone at $2.17                             1.86
Labor, mixing and placing at 19 cts. per hr.           0.80
                                                      -----
      Total                                           $5.38

~RESERVOIR FLOOR, PITTSBURG, PA.~--The following methods and costs of
laying a reservoir floor are given by Mr. Emile Low, M. Am. Soc. C. E.,
for the Hiland Reservoir constructed at Pittsburg, Pa., in 1884, by
contract. There were 7,681 cu. yds. of concrete in the floor which was 5
ins. thick and laid on a clay puddle foundation.

Natural cement costing $1.35 per barrel was used. The broken stone
varied in weight from 147 to 152 lbs. per cu. ft.; it was quarried and
hauled 20 miles by rail and then unloaded into small cars and hauled ½
mile to the reservoir. The cost of the stone per cubic yard delivered
was:

Quarrying, per cu. yd.                                  $0.45
Breaking, per cu. yd.                                    0.35
Transporting, per cu. yd.                                0.50

        Total                                           $1.30

The sand was obtained on the site at the cost of excavation, or 1¼ cts.
per bushel.

The method of proportioning and mixing the concrete was as follows:
Platforms 10×16 ft. of 2-in. plank were laid on the puddle foundation
and by these were set 5×4×1½-ft. boxes on legs. Into these boxes 1 bbl.
of cement and 2 bbls. of sand were emptied and thoroughly mixed dry,
then mixed with water to a thin grout. Five barrels of stone were placed
on the platform and thoroughly wetted; the grout was then emptied over
the stone and the two turned over three times with shovels. The concrete
was rammed until the mortar flushed to the surface. The following costs
cover various periods as follows:

  Two Days Work (101 cu. yds.):         Total.   Per cu. yd.
27 laborers, 2 days, at $1.25            $72.90      $0.7217
1 foreman, 2 days, at $2.50                5.00       0.0495
                                         ------      -------
        Total                            $77.90      $0.7712

  One Month's Work (1,302 cu. yds.):
642 days, laborers, at $1.35           $ 866.70      $0.6649
17 days, water boy, at $0.60              10.20       0.0078
22 days, foreman, at $2.50                55.00       0.0421
                                         ------      -------
        Total                           $931.90      $0.7148

  Two Days Work (101 cu. yds.):         Total.   Per cu. yd.
27 laborers, 2 days, at $1.25            $72.90      $0.7217
1 foreman, 2 days, at $2.50                5.00       0.0495
                                         ------      -------
        Total                            $77.90      $0.7712

  One Month's Work (1,302 cu. yds.):
642 days, laborers, at $1.35           $ 866.70      $0.6649
17 days, water boy, at $0.60              10.20       0.0078
22 days, foreman, at $2.50                55.00       0.0421
                                         ------      -------
        Total                           $931.90      $0.7148

Total Work (7,861 cu. yds.):

Quarrying stone                                      $0.45
Transporting stone                                    0.50
Breaking stone                                        0.35
1-1/3 bbl. natural cement                             1.80
8 bu. sand                                            0.10
Water                                                 0.05
Labor mixing and laying at $1.25                      0.75
Incidentals                                           0.05
                                                     -----
Total                                                $4.05

The contract price was $6 per cu. yd.

[Illustration: Fig. 286.--Form for Constructing Silo.]

~CONSTRUCTING A SILO.~--The form construction shown in Fig. 286 was
employed in building a silo 28 ft. high, 22 ft. 3 ins. interior
diameter, and having 6-in. walls. The bottom of the silo was made 9 ins.
thick and set 2 ft. below the surface. The reinforcement consisted of
ten 2½×3/16-in. rings spaced equally in the lower half and of woven wire
fencing in the upper half. The iron rings were hoops removed from an old
wooden silo. The concrete was a 1-6 mixture of Portland cement and sandy
gravel. Figure 286 is a section through the forms. There were twenty
T-shaped posts, which extended perpendicularly from the ground to a
height of 28 ft., being secured at top and bottom by a system of guy
ropes and posts. The rings, of which there are four, two inside and two
outside, were built of weather boards with their edges reversed. Four
thicknesses of board were used in each ring. The curbing consisted of
2×8-in. sticks 4 ft. long. Wedges driven between the vertical posts and
the rings held the latter in place. When the forms were to be removed
the wedges were knocked out and the rings sprung enough to permit the
removal of the curbing. The rings were then pushed up and fastened in
place for another section. The average rate of progress was one 4-ft.
section per day. The forms were filled in the afternoon and moved up the
following forenoon. Five-foot sections could have been built just as
readily.

The work was all done by farm laborers hired by the month and 100
man-days of such labor were required, excluding seven days work of a
mason brushing and troweling the surface. The cost of the work, not
including the old hoop iron or the old lumber used in forms, was as
follows:

  Item.                          Total.  Per cu. yd.
Cement                          $100.00        $2.62
Gravel and sand                   35.00         0.92
1 20-rod roll of fencing           5.20         0.01
New lumber                        18.00         0.47
100 days labor at $1.75          175.00         4.60
7 days mason troweling at $3.50   24.50         0.64
                                -------        -----
  Total, 38.2 cu. yds.          $357.70        $9.26

The external area of the silo is 1,950 sq. ft., which makes the cost of
brushing and troweling 1¼ cts. per sq. ft. There were about 2,300 ft. B.
M. of lumber used in the forms, or about 61 ft. B. M. per cu. yd. of
concrete.


~GROINED ARCH RESERVOIR ROOF.~--The following data are given by Mr. Allen
Hazen and Mr. William B. Fuller, in Trans. Am. Soc. C. E. 1904. The
concrete was mixed in 5-ft. cubical mixers in batches of 1.6 cu. yds. at
the rate of 200 cu. yds. per mixer day. One barrel of cement, 380 lbs.
net, assumed to be 3.8 cu. ft., was mixed with three volumes of sand
weighing 90 lbs. per cu. ft., and five volumes of gravel weighing 100
lbs. per cu. ft. and having 40 per cent voids. On the average 1.26 bbls.
of cement were required per cu. yd. The conveying plant consisted of two
trestles (each 900 ft. long) 730 ft. apart, supporting four cableways.
The cables were attached to carriages, which ran on I-beams on the top
of the trestles. Rope drives were used to shift the cableways along the
trestle. Three-ton loads were handled in each skip. The installation of
this plant was slow, and its carrying capacity was less than expected.
It was found best to deliver the skips of concrete to the cableway on
small railway track, although the original plan had been to move the
cableways horizontally along the trestle at the same time that the skip
was traveling.

The cost of mixing and placing the concrete was as follows:

                                                       Per cu. yd.
Measuring, mixing and loading                                $0.20
Transporting by rail and cables                               0.12
Laying and tamping floors and walls including setting forms   0.22
                                                             -----
  Total                                                      $0.54

The cost of laying and tamping the concrete on the vaulting was 14 cts.
per cu. yd. The vaulting is a groined arch 6 ins. thick at the crown and
2½ ft. thick at the piers.

The lumber of the centering for the vaulting was spruce for the ribs and
posts, and 1-in. hemlock for the lagging. The centering was all cut by
machinery, the ribs put together to a template, and the lagging sawed to
proper bevels and lengths. The centers were made so that they could be
taken down in sections and used again. The cost of centering was as
follows:

Labor on centers covering 62,560 sq. ft.

Foreman, 435 hrs. at 35 cts.                      $  152.25
Carpenters, 4,873 hrs. at 22½ cts.                 1,096.42
Laborers, 3,447 hrs. at 15 cts.                      517.05
Painters, 577 hrs. at 15 cts.                         86.55
Teaming, 324 hrs. at 40 cts.                         121.60
                                                  ---------
  Total labor building centers, 313 M. at $6.37   $1,973.87

Materials for centers covering 62,560 sq. ft.

313,000 ft. B. M. lumber, at $18.20               $5,700.00
3,700 lbs. nails, at 3 cts.                          111.00
8 bbls. tar, at $3                                    24.00
                                                  ---------
  Total                                           $5,835.00

These centers covered two filters, each having an area of 121-1/3×258
ft. There were six more filters of the same size, for which the same
centers were used. The cost of taking down, moving and putting up these
centers (313 M.) three times was as follows:

Foreman, 2,359 hrs. at 35 cts.                           $  825.65
Carpenters, 12,766 hrs. at 22½ cts.                       2,872.35
Laborers, 24,062 hrs. at 15 cts.                          3,609.30
Team, 430 hrs. at 40 cts.                                   172.00
3,000 ft. B. M. lumber, at $20                               60.00
3,000 lbs. nails, at 3 cts.                                  90.00
                                                         ---------

  Total cost of moving centers to cover 196,660 sq. ft.  $7,629.30

[Illustration: Fig. 287.--Forms for Constructing Grain Elevator Bins.]

The cost of moving the centers each time was $8.10 per M., showing that
they were practically rebuilt; for the first building of the centers, as
above shown, cost only $6.37 per M. In other words, the centers were not
designed so as to be moved in sections as they should have been.
Although the centers were used four times in all, the lumber was in fit
condition for further use. The cost of the labor and lumber for the
building and moving of these centers for the 8 filter beds, having a
total area of 259,220 sq. ft., was $15,438, or 6 cts. per sq. ft.

~GRAIN ELEVATOR BINS.~--In constructing cylindrical bins 30 ft. in
diameter and 90 ft. high for a grain elevator the forms shown by Fig.
287 were used. For the inside wall a complete ring of lagging 4 ft. high
nailed to circular horizontal ribs of 2×8-in. planks was used. For the
outside wall two, three or four segments fitting the clear spaces
between adjoining tanks were used, these panel segments being also 4 ft.
high. The inside and outside rings were held together by yokes
constructed as shown, and bolted to the inner and outer ribs. A staging
built up inside the tank carried jack screws, on which were seated the
inner legs of the yokes.




CHAPTER XXIII.

METHODS AND COST OF CONSTRUCTING ORNAMENTAL WORK.


The safest rule for ornamental work is to leave its construction to
those who make a specialty of such work. This is perfectly practicable
in most concrete structures having ornament. Bridge railings can be and
usually are made up of separately molded posts, balusters, bases and
rail. Ornamental columns in building work, keystones, medallions,
brackets, dentils, rosettes, and cornice courses can be similarly molded
and placed in the structure as the monolithic work reaches the proper
points. The general constructor, therefore, can readily delegate these
special parts of his concrete bridge or building to specialists at
frequently less cost to himself and nearly always with greater certainty
of good results than if he installed molds and organized a trained gang
for doing the work.

Good concrete ornament is not alone a matter of good design. It is also
a matter of skilled construction. Nearly anyone can mold an ornament,
but few can mold an ornament which is durable. To produce clean, sharp
lines and arises which will endure, the molder must have special
knowledge and familiarity with the action of cement and of concrete
mixtures, both in molding and on exposure to the elements. This is
knowledge that the general concrete worker rarely possesses but which
the ornament molder does possess if he knows his business. Special work
is always best left to the specialist.

While the more intricate ornamental work is best done by sub-contract,
so far at least as the actual molding of the ornaments is concerned,
there is a large amount of simple paneling and molding which the general
practitioner not only can do but must do. Knowledge of the best methods
of doing such work is essential and it is also essential that the
constructor should know in a general way of the special methods of
molding intricate ornaments.

~SEPARATELY MOLDED ORNAMENTS.~--The cement for ornamental work must be
strong and absolutely sound. Where an especially light color is wished a
light colored cement is desirable. So called white cements are now being
manufactured. Lafarge cement, a light colored, non-staining cement made
in France, gives excellent results. Of American cements, Vulcanite
cement has a light color, and next to it in this respect comes Whitehall
cement. A light colored ornament can, however, be secured with any
cement by using white sand or marble or other white stone screenings.
Some authorities advocate this method of securing light colored blocks
as always cheaper and usually superior to the use of special cements.
The choice between the two methods will be governed by the results
sought; where as nearly as possible a pure white is desired it stands to
reason that a white or nearly white cement will give the better results.

In the matter of sand and aggregate for ornamental work, the kinds used
will ordinarily be the kinds that are available. They must conform in
quality to the standard requirements of such materials for concrete
work. Where special colors or tints are wanted they can be secured by
using for sand and aggregate screenings from stones of the required
color. This is in all respects the best method of securing colored
blocks, as the color will not fade and the concrete is not weakened. A
great variety of pigments are made for coloring concrete; these colors
all fade in time, and with few exceptions they all weaken the concrete.
The mixtures used in ornamental work will depend upon the detail of the
ornament and upon whether color is or is not required. Generally a rich
mixture of cement and sand or fine stone screenings will be used for the
surface and will be backed with the ordinary concrete mixture. A surface
mixture of fine material is necessary where clear, sharp lines and edges
or corners are demanded.

The molds used for ornament are wooden molds, iron molds, sand molds and
plaster of Paris and special molds. Each kind has its field of
usefulness, and its advantages over the others. They will be considered
briefly in the order named.

~Wooden Molds.~--Wooden molds are perhaps the best for general work where
plain shapes and not too delicate ornamentation are wanted. They give
the best results only with a quite dry and rather coarse grained surface
mixture. If a wet mixture is used such water as flushes to the surface
cannot escape and small pits and holes are formed, which necessitates
grout or other finishing. The following are examples of wooden mold
work:

In constructing a five-span reinforced concrete arch bridge at Grand
Rapids, Mich., in 1904, the railings and ornamental parts of the bridge,
such as keystones, brackets, consols, dentiles and panels, were cast in
molds and set in place much as cut stone would be. Special molds were
employed for each of these different shapes. These molds were plastered
with an earth damp mortar composed of 1 part cement and 2½ parts fine
sand, which was followed up with a backing of wet concrete composed of 1
part cement, 2 parts sand and 3 parts broken stone passing a ¾-in. ring.
The facing mortar was made 1½ ins. thick. The castings cannot be told
from dressed stone at a few feet distance.

The part elevation and sections in the drawings of Fig. 288 show the
arrangement of the various castings to form the completed railing,
coping, etc. To specify, A is the arch ring, B the brackets, C the
coping, and D, E, F, respectively, the base, balusters and rail of
the bridge railing. The blocks G and H show the keystone and railing
post. The forms or molds for each of these parts are shown by the other
drawings of Fig. 288. A description of each of these forms follows:

The keystones were molded in wooden forms, consisting of one piece, a,
forming the top and front; of two side pieces, f, of a bottom
consisting of two parts, b and c; and of a back piece, g. The back
and side pieces are stiffened with 2×3½-in. pieces, and the front, sides
and back are held together by yokes or clamps. The front of the mold was
the only portion calling for particular work, and this was made of
boards laminated together.

The bracket molds consisted of two side pieces provided with grooves for
receiving the front and back pieces, and with slots for tie rods
clamping the whole mold together. It will be noted also that the side
pieces had nailed to them inside a beveled strip to form a groove in
each side of the cast block. The purpose of this groove was to provide a
bond to hold the bracket more firmly in the adjoining concrete of the
wall. The bottom of the mold was formed by a 2-in. plank, and when the
concrete had been tamped in place the forms were removed, and the
bracket was left on the bottom to set. It may be noted here that a
goodly number of the brackets showed a crack at the joint marked x
caused by tamping at the point y. In construction the bracket castings
were set at proper intervals on the spandrel walls, which had been
completed up to the level of the line X Y. The coping course was then
built up around the bracket blocks to the level of the bottom of the
railing base.

[Illustration: Fig. 288.--Molds for Railings and Ornaments for Concrete
Arch Bridge.]

The mold or form for the coping course was designed to build the coping
in successive sections, and was built up around the bracket blocks, and
supported from the centers as shown by the drawings. To form the
expansion joints in the coping course there were inserted across the
mold at proper intervals a short iron plate ¼ in. thick, cut to fit. The
cutting of this plate was found to be a slow operation.

The forms for the base of the railing (Section D) consisted of 1¾-in.
stock for the sides, and ¾-in. stock for the slopes. They extended
across the arch, and were held together by a very simple though very
efficient clamp. This consisted of two 2×3×33-in. pieces nailed to a
2×3×17-in. piece by means of galvanized iron strips. About half-way down
the long pieces, a ½-in. rod was run through, and secured up against
blocks, h, placed about 56 ins. apart. These blocks were removed as
the concrete was put in place. It will be noticed from the cross-section
of the railing that the balusters are set into sockets formed in the top
of the base course. These sockets were formed by means of the mold shown
at W and Z.

In casting the balusters, Section (E), a 3/8-in. cast iron mold,
consisting of four iron sides and an iron top, was used. Originally
there were two end plates of iron, but it was found more convenient to
have the bottom one of wood and allow the cast spindle to stand and set.
The mold was held together by ½-in. bolts. It would have been more
practical to have had the side casting composed of two parts.

The form for the railing is built up around the tops of the spindles.
The bottom piece is 1×9 ins., to which 4¼-in. ogee molding is nailed.
The sides are of 1-in. stock, and are clamped together. The top is
finished off with a trowel.

The mold for the posts is made in four parts, which fit together at the
top and bottom by a bevel joint, as shown in the one-fourth section. The
broad sides rest against the narrow ones, and are held against the same
by means of ½-in. rods running through 2×3-in. stock: 2-in. projections
of the broad sides facilitate the removal of the form from the completed
post.

[Illustration: Fig. 289.--Molds for Ornamental Railing Posts for
Concrete Facade for Bridge.]

In constructing a concrete facade for a plate girder bridge at St.
Louis. Mo., the railing above the base was constructed of separately
molded blocks as follows: The balusters were cast in plaster molds. To
make these molds a box square in plan and the height of the baluster
was constructed of wood and cut vertically into three sections. The
inside lateral dimensions of this box were made 6 ins. greater than the
largest dimension of the baluster. A full size wooden pattern of the
baluster was set up and the three sections of the box were set around
it. Sheets of thin galvanized metal, with their inner edges cut to
conform to the curves of the baluster, were inserted in the joints of
the assembled box so as to divide the vacant space between the pattern
and the box into vertical sections.

[Illustration: Fig. 290.--Railing for Arch Bridge.]

[Illustration: Fig. 291.--Form for Lattice Panels Shown by Fig. 290.]

A mixture of 1 part Portland cement and 1 part plaster of Paris, made
wet, was then poured around the pattern until the box was filled. When
this mixture had become hard, the box was taken down, leaving a plaster
and cement casing separated into three parts by the sheets of galvanized
metal. This casing was separated from the pattern and given a coat of
shellac on the inside. Four or five molds of this description were cast.
To cast a baluster, the sections were assembled and a ½-in. corrugated
bar was set vertically in the center. A mixture of 1 part Portland
cement and 3 parts sand was then poured into the mold and allowed to
harden. The molds for the urns on the railing post and the balls on the
end posts were made in exactly the same manner as the baluster molds.
The construction of the railing posts is shown by the drawings of Fig.
289. Referring first to the end posts, it will be seen that they were
molded in place in seven sections marked A, B, C, E, F, and G. The
construction of the mold for each section is shown by the
correspondingly lettered detail. The intermediate posts were built up of
the separately molded pieces I, K and H. The costs of molding the
several parts were: Balusters, 60 cts. each; hand rail, 40 cts. per lin.
ft. The six intermediate posts cost $12 each, and the four end or newel
posts cost $75 each.

[Illustration: Fig. 292.--Form for Hand Rail Shown by Fig. 290.]

In constructing the 72-ft. span-ribbed arch bridge over Deer Park Gorge,
near La Salle, Ill., a hand railing of the design shown by Fig. 290, was
used. In constructing this railing, the posts were molded in place, but
the open work panels between posts and the hand rail proper were molded
separately and set in place between the posts as indicated. For molding
the panels a number of boxes constructed as shown by Fig. 291, were
used. These were simple rectangular boxes on the bottom boards of which
were nailed blocks of the proper shape and in the proper position to
form the openings in the railing. The bottom of the form was first
plastered with mortar, then the concrete was filled in and plastered on
top. As soon as the concrete had begun to set the blocks were removed so
that final setting could take place without danger of cracking. When the
concrete had set so that the panel could be safely handled, it was
removed from the form and stored until wanted. The hand rail for each
side was molded in two pieces in forms constructed as shown by Fig. 292.
The total cost of the railing in place was about $2 per lineal foot.
The concrete was a 1-2-4 mixture of screenings and 7/8-in. broken stone.

~Iron Molds.~--Iron molds have the same disadvantages as wooden molds in
the use of wet mixtures. They can be made to mold more intricate
ornaments, and in the matter of durability, are, of course, far superior
to wood. Iron molds can be ordered cast to pattern in any well equipped
foundry. Many firms making block machines also make standard column,
baluster, ball and base, cornice, and base molds of various sizes and
patterns. These molds are made in two, three or more sections which can
be quickly locked together and taken apart. A column mold, for example,
will consist of a mold for the base, another for the shaft, and a third
for the capitol, each in collapsible sections. Where the pattern of the
shaft changes in its height, two shaft molds are commonly used, one for
each pattern. Prices of iron molds are subject to variation, but the
following are representative figures: Plain baluster molds 14 to 18 ins.
high, $7.50 to $10 each; fluted square balusters, 14 to 18 ins. high,
$10, each; ball and base, 10 to 18-in. balls, $15 to $25 each; fluted
Grecian column, base, capitol and one shaft molds, $30; Renaissance
column, base, capitol and two shaft molds, $45.

~Sand Molding.~--Molding concrete ornaments in sand is in all respects
like molding iron castings in a foundry. Sand molding gives perhaps the
handsomest ornament of any kind of molding process, the surface texture
and detail of the block being especially fine. It is, however, a more
expensive process than molding in wooden or iron molds, since a separate
mold must be made for each piece molded. The process was first employed
and patented in 1899, by Mr. C. W. Stevens, of Harvey, Ill., and for
this reason it is often called the Stevens process. Sand molded
ornaments and blocks are made by a number of firms to order to any
pattern. The process as employed at the works of the Roman Stone Co., of
Toronto, Ont., is as follows: The stone employed for aggregate, is a
hard, coarse, crystalline limestone of a light grey color, being
practically 97 per cent. calcium carbonate, with a small percentage of
iron, aluminia and magnesia. Nothing but carefully selected quarry
clippings are used and these are crushed and ground at the factory and
carefully screened into three sizes, the largest about the size of a
kernel of corn. Daily granulometric tests are made of the crusher output
to regulate the amount of each size got from the machines. It has been
found that next in importance to properly graded aggregates is the
gaging of the amount of water used in the mixture. This is done by an
automatically filled tank into which lead both hot and cold water and in
which is fixed a thermometer to properly regulate the temperature. In
gaging the mix about 20% of water is used, but of course when the cast
is made the surplus is immediately drawn off into the sand, where it is
retained and serves as a wet blanket to protect the cast and supply it
with the proper amount of water during crystallization. Experiments seem
to indicate that about 15% by weight gives the greatest amount of
strength of mortar at the age of six months, while, giving less strength
at shorter time tests than mortar gaged with a smaller percentage of
water.

The method of handling the mix and casting is quite simple and almost
identical with the practice in iron foundries. The mixture is made in a
batch mixer to about the same consistency as molasses, from which it is
poured into a mechanical agitator and carried about the foundry by a
traveling crane. This agitator is so constructed that it keeps the
materials in motion constantly and prevents their segregation. In each
cast is inserted the proper reinforcing rods, lifting hooks and tie
rods, and the casts are allowed to remain for a proper period in the wet
sand after they are poured; they are then taken to the seasoning room
which is kept at as constant a temperature as it is practical to
maintain. Each cast is marked with the number which determines its
location in the building and the date it was cast, and it is then kept
in the storage shed a fixed time before shipping.

Records are kept of each cast made and the company is able to get, as in
mills rolling structural steel, the exact number and location of all
casts made from the same mix. Careful records are always kept of the
tests of cement and material, and test cubes are made from each
consignment of cement so tested; in this way all danger of defective
stone through inferior cement is eliminated. The patterns used in
making the molds and the method of molding are quite similar to ordinary
iron foundry practice except that the sand used is of special nature.
The finish of the stone is generally tooled finish molded in the sand,
the different textures of natural stone being produced by the veneering
of the pattern with thin strips of wood which are run through a machine
producing the different finishes. Each stone is provided with setting
hooks cast in the blocks which take the place of the ordinary lewis
holes used in cut stone.

~Plaster Molds.~--Plaster of Paris molds are made from clay, gelatin or
other patterns in the usual manner adopted by sculptors. They are
particularly adapted to fine line and under cut ornaments. The concrete
is poured into the plaster mold and after the cement has become hard,
the plaster is broken or chiseled away, leaving the concrete exposed.
Two examples of excellent work in intricate concrete ornaments are
furnished by the power house for the Sanitary District of Chicago, and
by the State Normal School building, at Kearney, Neb. In the power
house, the ornamental work consisted of molded courses, cornice work;
and particularly of heavy capitals for pilasters. These capitals were
very heavy, being 7½ ft. long and of the Ionic design. These were made
from plaster molds; made so as to be taken apart or knocked down and to
release in this way, perfectly. There were also scrolls, keystones and
arches in curved design over all of the 40 windows. None of this
ornament was true under cut work. In building the Normal School
building, Corinthian capitals, in quarters, halves, corners and full
rounds were made in plaster molds. There were some 30 of these capitols.
They were made in solid plaster molds; the molds having been cast in
gelatine molds, one for each capitol. Into these, the concrete was
tamped, made very wet, and after the concrete had hardened, the plaster
cast was chiseled away. This was very easily accomplished. These
capitols were true Corinthians, having all the floriation and under-cut
usually seen in such capitols.

~ORNAMENTS MOLDED IN PLACE.~--Molding ornaments in place is usually, and
generally should be, confined to belt courses, cornices, copings and
plain panels. Relief work, like keystones, scrolls or rosettes, can be
molded in place if desired, by setting plaster molds in the wooden forms
at the proper points. This method is often advantageous in bridge work,
where comparatively few ornaments are required, such as keystones.

[Illustration: Fig. 293.--Spandrel Wall Mold for Arch Bridge.]

The construction of forms for ornamental work in place is best described
by taking specific examples. Figure 293, shows the face form for the
arch ring, spandrel wall and cornice or coping course of the Big Muddy
River Bridge on the Illinois Central R. R. The section is taken near the
crown of the arch. The lagging only is shown; this was, of course,
backed with studding. The point to be noted in this form is the
avoidance of any approach to under cut work; there are, in fact, very
few straight cut details. This brings up a point that must be carefully
watched if trouble is to be avoided, namely, the construction of the
form work in sections which can be removed without fracturing the
ornament. To illustrate by an assumed example, supposing it is required
to mold the wall and cornice shown by Fig. 294. It is clear that if the
backing studs are in single pieces, notched as shown, the forms cannot
be removed without fracturing at least the corner A. If the studs and
lagging be constructed in two parts, separated along the line a b, the
form is possible of removal if great care is used without damage to the
concrete. The construction shown by this sketch does not greatly
exaggerate matters. Figure 295 shows a wall form that has been given
several times as a presumably good example in which, as will be seen it
is impossible to remove the board a, without breaking the concrete
even if the narrow face were not broken by the swelling of the lumber
before ever it became time to take down the forms.

[Illustration: Fig. 294.--Diagram Illustrating Details of Mold
Construction.]

[Illustration: Fig. 295.--Example of Poor Wall Form Construction.]

This matter of making provision for the swelling of the forms is another
point to be watched. Referring again to Fig. 294 it will be seen that
the swelling of the lagging, even if the cornice instead of being under
cut at A were straight cut on the line c d, is liable so to crowd
the lagging into the corner A and B that the concrete is cracked
along the lines e f or g h. A suggested remedy for this danger is
shown by Fig. 296. At a distance of every 3 or 4 ft. insert a narrow
piece of lagging a and behind these lagging strips cut notches b in
the studs. When the concrete has got its initial set pull back the
lagging strip a into the notches b, leaving an open joint to provide
for expansion due to swelling.

[Illustration: Fig. 296.--Notched Studding for Removal of Lagging Board
to Permit Swelling.]

[Illustration: Fig. 297.--Form for Concrete Facade Shown by Fig. 298.]

[Illustration: Fig. 298.--Concrete Facade for Plate Girder Bridge.]

[Illustration: Fig. 299.--Forms for Curved Concrete Abutments.]

[Illustration: Fig. 300.--Cornice Form.]

[Illustration: Fig. 301.--Method of Supporting Cornice Form Shown by
Fig. 300.]

In constructing a concrete facade for a plate girder bridge at St.
Louis, Mo., the form shown by Fig. 297 was used. The completed facade is
shown by Fig. 298. The ceiling slab was first built and allowed to set
and then the forms were erected for the frieze and coping. After these
were molded the forms were continued upward as shown for the base of the
railing. Above this point the several parts were separately molded as
shown by Fig. 285 previously described. Molded in this manner the
ceiling cost 25 cts. per sq. ft.; the frieze and coping cost $2 per lin.
ft., and the railing base cost 45 cts. per lin. ft. In constructing the
concrete abutments of this same structure use was made of the forms
shown by Fig. 299. These abutments had curved wing walls and for molding
these girts cut to the radii of the curves were fastened to the studs
and vertical lagging was nailed to the girts. All the lagging was tongue
and groove stuff.

[Illustration: Fig. 302.--Cornice and Balustrade for Arch Bridge.]

In constructing an open spandrel arch bridge at St. Paul, Minn., the
cornice form shown by Fig. 300, supported as shown by Fig. 301, was
used. The particular feature of this form was the use of a lath and
plaster lining to the lagging. This lining was used for all exposed
surfaces of the bridge. So called patent lath consisting of boards with
parallel dovetail grooves and ridges was used. This was plastered with
cement mortar and the concrete was deposited directly against the
plaster after smearing the plaster surface with boiled linseed oil. This
lining is stated to have given an excellent surface finish to the
concrete. It cost 55 cts. per sq. ft. for materials and labor. A section
of the balustrade and cornice is shown by Fig. 302. The posts, balusters
and railing were molded separately. The balusters were molded in zinc
molds. At first some trouble was had in getting good casts on account
of air pockets. This was largely done away with by filling the mold as
compactly as possible and then driving a ¾-in. iron rod through the
center vertically; this rod crowded the concrete into all parts of the
mold and also served to strengthen the baluster. The baluster molds were
made in two parts; this proved a mistake--three parts would have been
better.




CHAPTER XXIV.

MISCELLANEOUS DATA ON MATERIALS, MACHINES AND COSTS.


The following cost data comprise such miscellaneous items as do not
properly come in the preceding chapters. They are given not as including
all the miscellaneous purposes for which concrete is used but as being
such items of costs as were secured in collecting the more important
data given in preceding sections.

[Illustration: Fig. 303.--Device for Drilling Green Concrete.]

~DRILLING AND BLASTING CONCRETE.~--Concrete is exceedingly troublesome
material in which to drill deep holes, and this statement is
particularly true if the concrete is green. The following mode of
procedure proved successful in drilling 1½-in. anchor bolt holes 6 ft.
and over in depth in green concrete. The apparatus used is shown by Fig.
303, re-drawn from a rough sketch made on the work by one of the
authors, and only approximately to scale. The drill is hung on a small
pile driver frame, occupying exactly the position the hammer would
occupy in a pile driver, and is raised and lowered by a hand windlass.
By this arrangement a longer drill could be used than with the ordinary
tripod mounting and less changing of drills was necessary. A wide flare
bit was used, permitting a small copper pipe to be carried into the hole
with the drill; through this pipe water was forced under pressure,
carrying off the chips so rapidly that no wedging was possible. By this
device drilling which had previously cost over 25 cts. a hole was done
at a cost of less than 5 cts. a hole.

In removing an old cable railway track in St. Louis, Mo., holes 8 ins.
deep were drilled in the concrete with a No. 2 Little Jap drill, using a
1¼-in. bit and air at 90 lbs. pressure. A dry hole was drilled, the
exhaust air from the hollow drill blowing the dust from the hole keeping
it clean. The concrete was about 18 years old and very hard. Two holes
across track were drilled, one 10 ins. inside each rail; lengthwise of
the track the holes were spaced 24 ins. apart, or four pairs of holes
between each pair of yokes.

Common labor was used to run the drills and very little mechanical
trouble was experienced. Three cars were fitted up, one for each gang,
each car being equipped with a motor-driven air compressor, water for
cooling the compressors being obtained from the fire plugs along the
route. The air compressors were taken temporarily from those in use in
the repair shops, no special machines being bought for the purpose.
Electricity for operating the air compressor motors was taken from the
trolley wire over the tracks. The car was moved along as the holes were
drilled, air being conveyed from the car to the drills through a
flexible hose. Two drills were operated normally from each car. One of
the air compressors was exceptionally large and at times operated four
drills. The total number of holes drilled in the reconstruction of the
track was 31,000. The total feet of hole drilled was 20,700 ft.

With the best one of the plants operating two to three drills 30 8-in.
holes, or 20.3 ft. of hole, were drilled per hour per drill at a labor
cost of 2.7 cts. per foot.

For blasting, a 0.1-lb. charge of 40 per cent. dynamite was used in each
hole. A fulminating cap was used to explode the charge, and 12 holes
were shot at one time by an electric firing machine. The dynamite was
furnished from the factory in 0.1-lb. packages, and all the preparation
necessary on the work was to insert the fulminating cap in the dynamite,
tamp the charge into the hole and connect the wires to the firing
machine. In order to prevent any damage being done by flying rocks at
the time of the explosion, each blasting gang was supplied with a cover
car, which was merely a flat car with a heavy bottom and side boards.
When a charge was to be fired, this car was run over the 12 holes and
the side boards let down, so that the charge was entirely covered. This
work was remarkably free from accidents. There were no personal accident
claims whatever, and the total amount paid out for property damages for
the whole six miles of construction was $685. Most of this was for glass
broken by the shock of explosion. There was no glass broken by flying
particles. The men doing this work, few of whom had ever done blasting
before, soon became very skillful in handling the dynamite, and the work
advanced rapidly. The report made by the firing of the 12 holes was no
greater than that made by giant fire-crackers.

For the drilling and blasting the old rail had been left in place to
carry the air compressor car and the cover car. After the blasting, this
rail was removed and the concrete, excavated to the required depth. In
most cases the cable yokes had been broken by the force of the blast.
Where these yokes had not been broken, they were knocked out by blows
from pieces of rail. The efficacy of the blasting depended largely upon
the proper location of the hole. Where the holes had been drilled close
to the middle of the concrete block, so that the dynamite charge was
exploded a little below the center of gravity of the section, the
concrete was well shattered and could be picked out in large pieces.
Where the hole had been located too close to either side of the concrete
block, however, the charge would blow out at one side and a large mass
of solid concrete would be left intact on the other side. The total
estimated quantity of concrete blasted was 6,558 cu. yds., or 0.2 cu.
yd. of concrete per lineal foot of track. The cost of the dynamite
delivered in 0.1 lb. packages was 13 cts. per pound. The exploders cost
$0.0255 each.

The cost of drilling and blasting was as follows:

  Item.                        Per mile.  Per lin. ft.  Per cu. yd.
Labor, drilling                 $ 89.76         $0.017       $0.085
Blasting labor and materials.    285.12          0.054        0.268
                                -------         ------       ------
  Total drilling and blasting.  $374.88         $0.071       $0.353

[Illustration: Fig. 304.--Bench Monument, Chicago, Ill.]

The cost of blasting with labor and materials, separately itemized, was
as follows, per cubic yard:

Dynamite and exploders     $0.192
Labor                       0.076
                           ------
  Total                    $0.268

Two cubic yards of concrete were blasted per pound of dynamite.

~BENCH MONUMENTS, CHICAGO, ILL.~--The standard bench monuments, Fig. 304,
used in Chicago, Ill., are mostly placed in the grass plot between the
curb and the lot line, so that the top of the iron cover comes just
level with the street grade or flush with the surface of the cement
walk. The monument consists of a pyramidal base 6 ft. high and 42 ins.
square at the bottom, with a ¼-in.×2-ft. copper rod embedded, and of a
cast iron top and cover constructed as shown by the drawing. Mr. W. H.
Hedges, Bench and Street Grade Engineer, Department of Public Works,
Chicago, Ill., gives the following data regarding quantities and cost.
The materials required for each monument are: 1.78 cu. yd. crushed
stone, 0.6 cu. yd. torpedo sand, 1½ bbls. cement, 60 ft. B. M. lumber,
one ¼×24-in. copper rod, one top and cover. A gang consisting of 1
foreman, 4 laborers and 2 teams construct from one to three monuments
per day, the average number being two per 8-hour day. In 1906 the
average cost of the monuments was $24.12 each, based on above material
and labor charges.

[Illustration: Fig. 305.--Base for Wooden Pole.]

[Illustration: Fig. 306.--Mile Post, Chicago & Eastern Illinois Ry.]

~POLE BASE.~--Figure 305 shows a concrete base for transmission line poles
invented by Mr. M. H. Murray, of Bakersfield, Cal., and used by the
Power Transit & Light Co. of that city. These bases are molded and
shipped to the work ready for placing. They weigh about 420 lbs. each.
One base requires 37½ lbs. of 2×¼-in. steel bar, 40 lbs. of Portland
cement, 3 cu. ft. of broken stone or gravel and enough sand to fill the
form or mold, which is 10×10 ins. by 4½ ft. Unskilled labor is employed
in the molding and two men can mold ten bases per 8-hour day. The cost
of molding is as follows per base:

2 men at $2 per day         $0.40
Brace irons per set          2.50
1-9 cu. yd. stone at $4.05   0.45
40 lbs. cement at 1½ cts.    0.60
Sand                         0.15
                            -----
  Total cost                $4.10

Two men at $2 per day each set five bases in eight hours, making the
cost of setting 80 cts. per base. The bases were sunk to a depth of 3
ft. 3 ins. In many cases they were placed under poles without
interrupting service by sawing off the pole, dropping it into the
ground, placing the new base and setting the sawed-off pole on it and
bolting up the straps.

~MILE POST, CHICAGO & EASTERN ILLINOIS R. R.~--The dimensions of the post
are shown by Fig. 306. Each post weighs 498 lbs. They are made when
other concrete work is being done. The form is laid flat, with the molds
for the letters on the bottom, and bottom and sides are plastered with
mortar, which is backed up with a 1-1-2 stone concrete. The cost of the
post is given as follows:

¼ barrel of cement at $2                          $0.50
267 lbs. crushed stone                             0.01
133 lbs. sand                                      0.01
1-1/3 hours labor at 15 cts.                       0.20
1/3 hour carpenter changing letters at 25 cts.     0.08
Coloring cement                                    0.02
                                                  -----
  Total                                           $0.82

~BONDING NEW CONCRETE TO OLD.~--Concrete which has set hard has a surface
skin or glaze to which fresh concrete will not adhere strongly unless
special effort is made to perfect the bond. Various ways of doing this
are practiced. The most common is to clean the hardened surface from all
loose material and give it a thorough wash of cement grout against which
the fresh concrete is deposited and rammed before the grout has had time
to set. Washing the old surface with a hose or scrubbing it with a brush
and water improves the bond, as does also the hard tamping of the
concrete immediately over the joint. Mortar may be used in place of
grout. The thorough cleansing of the surface is, however, quite as
essential as the bonding coat, in fact in the opinion of the authors it
is more essential. As a rule, a good enough joint for ordinary purposes
can be got by tamping the fresh concrete directly against the old
concrete, without grout or mortar coating, if the surface of the latter
is thoroughly cleaned by scrubbing and flushing. The secret of securing
a good bond between fresh concrete and concrete that has set lies
largely in getting rid of the glaze skin and the slime and dust which
forms on it. Washing will go far toward doing this. The glaze skin can
be removed entirely by acid solutions, but the acid wash must be flushed
free from the surface before placing the fresh concrete. Ransomite, made
by the Ransome Concrete Machinery Co., Dunellen, N. J., is a prepared
acid wash which to the authors' knowledge has given excellent success in
a number of cases. The glaze coat can also be removed by picking the
hardened surface, but the picking should be followed by washing to
remove all loose chips and dust.

~DIMENSIONS AND CAPACITIES OF MIXERS.~--In planning plant lay-outs it is
often desirable to know the sizes, capacities, etc., of various mixers
in order to make preliminary estimates. Tables XXII to XXXIII give these
data for a number of the more commonly employed machines. The Eureka,
the Advanced and the Scheiffler mixers are continuous mixers and the
others are batch mixers.


Table XXII--Sizes, Capacities and Weights of Advanced Mixers.
Cement Machinery Co., Jackson, Mich.

Height ground to hopper top            3' 6"
Width over all                         3' 6"
Length over all on trucks             10' 6"
Capacity per hour, cu. yds.         25 to 75
Horsepower, engine                         2
  Weight:
On trucks, without power, lbs.         1,700
On trucks, steam engine                2,000
On trucks, gas engine                  2,200
On trucks, steam engine and boiler     2,500


Table XXIII--Sizes, Capacities and Weights of Scheiffler Proportioning
Mixers. The Hartwick Machinery Co., Jackson, Mich.

  Mixer Number.                            No. 2.   No. 2½.    No. 3.
Dimensions of hopper, ins.                  55×33     53×33     60×40
Height, from ground to top of hopper, ins.     43        43        48
Width over all on trucks, ins.                 46        46        46
Length over all on trucks, ins.               126       126       132
Hourly capacity in cubic yards                5-6         8     12-15
Horsepower required, gasoline engine            2         3         4
Horsepower required, steam engine.                        3         4
  Weights:
On trucks, without power, lbs.              2,400     2,900     3,300
On trucks, gasoline engine, lbs.            3,000     3,600     4,500
On trucks, steam engine, lbs.               2,800     3,330     4,000
On trucks, steam engine and boiler, lbs.    3,500     3,700     4,800


Table XXIV--Sizes, Capacities and Weights of Eureka Mixers.
Eureka Machine Co., Lansing, Mich.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
                               |          |          |          |
Mixer Number                   |  No. 81  |  No. 82  |  No. 83  |
-------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|
                   _           |          |          |          |
                   |  Sand     | 18"×25½" |          |          |
Size hoppers, ins. |  Cement   | 17"×25½" |    do    |    do    |
                   |_ Stone    | 30"×25"  |          |          |
Height, ground to hopper top   |    49"   |    49"   |    49"   |
Width over all on trucks       |    40"   |    40"   |    40"   |
Length over all on trucks      | 12'-9"   | 10'-0"   | 10'-0"   |
Capacity per hour, cu. yds.    | 10 to 18 | 10 to 18 | 10 to 18 |
Engine horsepower              |  3 stm.  |  3 stm.  |  3½ gas  |
Boiler horsepower              |    4     |          |          |
Weight on trucks, no power     |   1,980  |   1,980  |   1,980  |
Weight trucks steam engine     |   2,800  |          |          |
Weight trucks gas engine       |          |          |   2,300  |
Weight trucks, eng. and boiler |   3,000  |          |          |
-------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|

-----------------------------------------------------------------
                               |            |          |
Mixer Number                   |   No. 84   |  No. 25  | No. 23
-------------------------------|------------|----------|----------
                    _          |            |          |
                   |  Sand     |  18"×25½"  | 18"×25½" | 18"×25½"
Size hoppers, ins. |  Cement   |  17"×25½"  | 17"×25½" | 17"×25½"
                   |_ Stone    |  30"×25"   |          |
Height, ground to hopper top   |     49"    |    49"   |    49"
Width over all on trucks       |     40"    |    40"   |    40"
Length over all on trucks      |   10'-0"   |  8'-0"   |  8'-0"
Capacity per hour, cu. yds.    |  10 to 18  | 10 to 18 |  2 to 4
Engine horsepower              | 3 el. motr |  Pulley. |   Hand.
Boiler horsepower              |            |          |
Weight on trucks, no power     |    1,980   |   1,400  |   1,400
Weight trucks steam engine     |            |          |
Weight trucks gas engine       |            |          |
Weight trucks, eng. and boiler |            |          |
-------------------------------|------------|----------|----------


Table XXV--Sizes, Capacities and Weights of Snell Mixers.
R. Z. Snell Mfg. Co., South Bend, Ind.

  Mixer Number.                 No. 0.     No. 1.     No. 2.   No. 3.
Size batch, cu. ft.                  3          7         11       24
Capacity per hour, cu. yds.          2½         5          8       20
Speed revs. per min.                30         30         25       19
  Weight on Skids:
With pulley, lbs.                  480        800        900    2,000
With engine, lbs.                  800      1,550      2,050    3,500
With eng. and boiler, lbs.                  2,170      2,900    4,000
  Weight on Wheels:
With engine, lbs.                1,100      2,200      3,450    4,700
With engine and boiler, lbs.                3,570      4,750    5,200
  Engine:
Size cylinder, ins.                4×6       3½×4½       4×5      5×6½
Rated horsepower                   1½         4          5        6
  Boiler:
Size, ins.                                   24×60      26×60    30×60
Rated horsepower                              5          6        8
Outside dimensions on skids     2'9"×4'    3'4"×5'6"    4'×6'    6'×9'
Total height on skids            3'8"        4'6"        5'       5'6"


Table XXVI--Sizes, Capacities and Horsepower of Ransome Mixers.
Ransome Concrete Machinery Co., Dunellen, N. J.

  Mixer number.             No. 1.    No. 2.   No. 3.   No. 4.
Size batch, cu. ft.       10 to 14       20       30        40
Capacity per hr., cu. yds.      10       20       30        40
Speed, Revs. per min.           16       15       14½       14
  Weight on Skids:
Pulley or gear, lbs.          3,300    3,650    5,900    7,400
With engine, lbs.             4,600    5,050    7,700    9,250
With engine and boiler, lbs.  6,450    8,700   12,200   14,700
  Weight on Wheels:
With engine, lbs.             5,100    5,550    8,200    9,750
With engine and boiler, lbs.  6,950    9,200   12,700   15,000
  Engines:
Size cylinder, ins.            6×6      7×7      8×8      9×9
Rated horsepower                7       10       14       20
  Boiler:
Size, ins.                    36×69   42×75    42×87    48×93
Rated horsepower               10       15       20       30


Table XXVII--Sizes, Capacities and Horsepowers of Chicago Improved Cube
Mixers. Municipal Engineering and Contracting Co., Chicago, Ill.

  Mixer                            No.     No.       No.     No.     No.    No.
  number.                "Handy."   6.     11.       17.     22.     33.    64.
Size batch, cu. ft.           2½    6      11        17      22      33     64
Capacity per hr., cu. yds.    5½   13      24        40      50      70    120
Speed, revs. per min.        24    20      18        17      16      15     12
  Weight on Skids:
Pulley or gear, lbs.       1,000  1,900   2,800     5,000   7,000   9,600 19,000
With engine, lbs.          2,500  3,600   6,100     8,200  12,000
With eng. and boiler, lbs. 3,100  4,300   7,800    10,000  16,000
  Weight on Wheels:
With engine, lbs.          1,400  3,200   4,500     7,100   9,500  15,000
With eng. and boiler, lbs.        4,000   6,000     8,800  10,300  17,000
  Engine:
Size cylinder, ins.               4×4     6×6       6½×7    7×8     8×9
Rated horsepower             2      3       6         8      12      15     30
Boiler, rated horsepower            4       8        10      15      18     35
Width over all            4'-5"    5'-10"  7'-1"     7'-8"   8'-6"  9'-8"
Length over all           4'-10"   6'-9"   8'-0"     8'-10" 10'-2" 13'-6"
Height bot. sill to
  charging hopper         3'-4¼"   3'-5"   3'-10"    4'-7"  5'-0"   5'-9"
Additional height on
wheels                    9-7/8" 1'-5-1/8" 1'-5-1/8" 6-3/8"  5½"


Table XXVIII--Sizes, Capacities and Horsepowers of Cropp Mixers.
A. J. Cropp, Concrete Machinery, Chicago, Ill.

  Mixer number.            No. 0.   No. 1.   No. 2.   No. 3.   No. 4.
Size batch, cu. ft.       7 to 8       10       13       16       20
Cap. per hr., cu. yds.        15       20       25       30       40
Speed, revs. per min.         12       10       10       10       10
  Weight on Skids:
With engine, lbs.           1,375    1,650    1,700    1,975    2,100
With eng. and boiler, lbs.  2,575    2,950    3,000    3,775    3,900
  Weight on Wheels:
With engine, lbs.           1,775    2,050    2,200    2,475    2,600
With eng. and boiler, lbs.  2,900    3,350    3,400    4,250    4,350
  Engine:
Size cylinder, ins.         4×4        5×5      5×5      6×6      6×6
Rated horsepower              3        5        5        7        7
  Boiler:
Size inside               24"×4'   24"×6'   24"×6'   30"×6'   30"×6'
Rated horsepower              4        6        6        9        9
Out. dimensions on skids     40"      40"      40"      48"      48"
Total height                 50"      56"      56"      56"      62"
  Height fr. ground on trucks:
Charging, ins.               20       20       20       20       20
Discharging, ins.            30       30       30       30       30


TABLE XXIX--SIZES, CAPACITIES AND HORSEPOWERS OF CHICAGO CONCRETE MIXERS.
Chicago Concrete Machinery Co., Chicago, Ill.

    Number of mixer.                     No. 00.    No. 0.    No. 1.    No. 2.
Standard charge in cu. ft.  cement             ½         1         1         2
           "        "       Sand              1½         2½        4         8
           "        "       stone             3          5         8        16
Total unmixed batch in cu. ft                 5         8½        13        26
Mixed concrete per batch, loose in cu. ft.    3½         6         9        18
Cubic yards of unmixed material per hour,
  45 batches per hour                         8         14        21        42
Cubic yards of mixed concrete per hour,
  45 batches per hour                         6         10        15        30
Minimum horsepower required                   2          4         6         8
Revolutions of driving pulley per min       200        190       185       170
Revolutions of drum per min                  20         18        15        13
Diameter and face of driving pulley       20×3½      20×4½     24×5½     28×6½
    Weight:
On skids with pulley, lbs.                1,550      2,150     2,900     4,850
On truck with pulley or gears, lbs.       1,800      2,550     3,500     5,150
On skids with st. engine only, lbs.         ...      2,400     3,400     4,600
On truck with st. engine only               ...      2,900     4,000     5,300
On skids with st. eng. and boiler, lbs.     ...      2,800     4,700     6,000
On truck with st. eng. and boiler, lbs.   2,400      4,200     5,750     7,850
On skids with gasoline engine, lbs.       2,000      3,500     5,000     6,500
On truck with gasoline engine, lbs.       2,400      4,300     5,800     7,800


TABLE XXX--SIZES, CAPACITIES AND HORSEPOWERS OF KOEHRING MIXERS.
Koehring Machine Co., Milwaukee, Wis.

    Mixer number.                       No. 0-B.  No. 1-B.  No. 2-B.  No. 3-B.
Capacity per charge, in cu. ft                 7        11       22         27
Capacity per hour in cu. yds                   7        14       25         30
Horsepower, steam engine                       4         6        8         10
Horsepower, steam boiler                       5         8       10         14
Horsepower, gasoline engine                    4         6       10         12
Horsepower, electric motor                     5         6        7½        10
Speed of drum                                 20        17       15         15
Speed of intermediate shaft                  132       108       75         75
Weight of mixer on skids                   1,800     2,800    5,200      5,500
Weight of mixer on skids, with steam eng.  2,300     3,550    6,500      7,000
Weight of mixer on skids, with steam
  engine and boiler                        3,300     5,000    8,000      9,300
Weight of mixer on skids, gasoline
  engine and housing                       3,000     4,400    7,500      8,600
Weight of trucks with pole                   400       600      850        950
Weight of automatic loading bucket
  complete                                   500       700    1,000      1,100
Weight of mixing through complete            200       250      400        400


TABLE XXXI--SIZES, CAPACITIES AND HORSEPOWERS OF SMITH MIXERS.
Contractors' Supply & Equipment Co., Chicago, Ill.

Mixer number.                No. 0.   No. 1.   No. 2.  No. 2½.  No. 4.    No. 5.

Stand. charge cu. ft. Cement    1        1        2        2         3         4
  "      "     "   "  Sand      2½       4        6        7½       10½       14
  "      "     "   "  Stone     5        8       12       15        21        28
Total unmixed per batch,
  cu. ft.                       8½      13       20       24½       34½       46
Mixed material per batch
  (loose), cu. ft.              6        9       13½      16½       22        30
Cubic  yards  mixed  per
  hour, up to                   9       20       30       39        46        62
Power required--H.P.            4        6        8       10        15        19
Revs. per minute of
  driving pulley              218      180      173      162       160       125
Diameter and face of
  driving pulley, ins.      20×4½  24×5½  28×5½  28×6½  36×6½    48×7½
Weight on skids with
  pulley only, lbs.         1,740    2,500    3,600    4,400     6,200     7,900
Weight on truck with
  pulley or gears, lbs.     2,200    3,650    4,750    5,500     7,400      ....
Weight  on  truck  with
  steam eng. & boil., lbs.  3,750    5,600    7,200    8,600    11,400      ....
Weight on truck with
  gasoline engine, lbs      4,000    5,100    7,400    9,300      ....      ....


TABLE XXXII--SIZES, WEIGHTS AND CAPACITIES OF POLYGON MIXER.
Waterloo Cement Machinery Co., Waterloo, Iowa.

    Mixer number.                       No. 4.  No. 5.  No. 6.  No. 7.

Maximum charge, cu. ft.                      6      10      12      16
Cubic yards mixed per day (10 hrs.) up to   60     190     130     180
Weight on skids with pulley (approx.)    1,600   2,200   3,500   4,000
Weight on skids with steam engine and
    boiler (approx.)                     3,100   3,900   5,500   6,200
Weight on skids with gasoline  engine
    (approx.)                            2,900   3,900   5,100   5,700
Weight on trucks with steam engine and
    boiler (approx.)                     3,600   4,600   6,000   7,000
Weight on trucks with gasoline engine
    (approx.)                            3,400   4,650   5,700   6,750

~DATA FOR ESTIMATING THE WEIGHT OF STEEL IN REINFORCED
CONCRETE.~--Architects' and engineers' plans record the steel used in
reinforced concrete in various ways. Sometimes complete schedules of
shapes, dimensions and weights of the various reinforcing elements are
drawn up and submitted to bidders with the plans. In such cases the
estimating is usually a simple problem for the contractor. In other
cases the amount of steel that will be required is stated as a
percentage of the volume of the concrete. In still other cases the
detail drawings merely show the number, location and dimensions of the
reinforcing bars, stirrups, etc., and the contractor has to compile from
them his own schedule of quantities. The following tables and discussion
will aid the contractor in making his estimates. Before proceeding with
these data, however, the authors would strongly advise that to
facilitate rapid estimating the contractor should keep accurate records
of all reinforced concrete structures in such form as to show the
percentages of steel used. In doing this, however, he should be careful
to separate the foundations, etc., which are not reinforced from the
superstructure which is reinforced. A reinforced concrete arch bridge,
for example, usually rests on piers and abutments which are not
reinforced. Do not lump together all the concrete in recording the
weight of reinforcement used, but separate the reinforced arch from the
unreinforced portions.

~Method of Computing Weight from Percentage of Volume.~--In a cubic yard
of concrete there is 1 per cent. of 27 cu. ft. or 0.27 cu. ft. of steel
if the reinforcement is 1 per cent. Now a cubic foot of steel weighs 490
lbs., but for all practical purposes we can call it 500 lbs. Hence
reinforced concrete containing 1 per cent. of steel has 0.27 × 500 = 135
lbs. per cubic yard. Table XXXIII has been computed in this manner;
knowing the price of steel it is a matter of simple multiplication to
estimate from the table the cost of steel for any percentage of
reinforcement.

~Weights and Dimensions of Plain and Special Reinforcing Metals.~--Steel
for reinforcement is used in the shape of plain round and square bars,
deformed bars, woven and welded netting and metal mesh of various sorts.
Tables XXXIV to XXXVII show the weights, dimensions, etc., of these
various metals.


TABLE XXXIII--SHOWING WEIGHT OF STEEL PER CUBIC FOOT AND PER CUBIC YARD OF
CONCRETE FOR VARIOUS PERCENTAGES OF REINFORCEMENT.

Per cent            Lbs. steel         Lbs. steel
of steel.           Per cu. ft.         Per cu. yd.
   0.20                1.00                27.0
   0.25                1.25                33.8
   0.30                1.50                40.5
   0.35                1.75                47.3
   0.40                2.00                54.0
   0.45                2.25                60.8
   0.50                2.50                67.5
   0.55                2.75                74.3
   0.60                3.00                81.0
   0.65                3.25                87.5
   0.70                3.50                94.5
   0.75                3.75               101.3
   0.80                4.00               108.0
   0.85                4.25               114.8
   0.90                4.50               121.5
   0.95                4.75               128.3
   1.00                5.00               135.0


TABLE XXXIV--WEIGHTS OF ROUND AND SQUARE BARS OF DIMENSIONS COMMONLY
USED FOR REINFORCING CONCRETE.

Thickness or            Weight of square    Weight of round
diameter in inches     bars. Lbs. per ft.   rods. Lbs. per ft.
       1/16                     0.013               0.010
       1/8                      0.053               0.042
       3/16                     0.119               0.094
       ¼                        0.212               0.167
       5/16                     0.333               0.261
       3/8                      0.478               0.376
       7/16                     0.651               0.511
       ½                        0.850               0.668
       9/16                     1.076               0.845
       5/8                      1.328               1.043
       11/16                    1.607               1.262
       ¾                        1.913               1.502
       7/8                      2.608               2.044
       1                        3.400               2.670
       1-1/8                    4.303               3.380
       1¼                       5.312               4.172
       1½                       7.650               6.008
       1¾                      10.404               4.178
       2                       13.600               10.68


TABLE XXXV--DIMENSIONS AND WEIGHT OF EXPANDED METAL.

             Mesh,      Sectional area sq.      Weight, lbs.
            inches.     ins. per ft. width.      per sq. ft.
Standard        ½              0.209                0.74
Standard        ¾              0.225                0.80
Standard       1½              0.207                0.70
Standard       2               0.166                0.56
Standard       3               0.083                0.28
Light          3               0.148                0.50
Standard       3               0.178                0.60
Heavy          3               0.267                0.90
Extra heavy    3               0.356                1.20
Standard       3               0.400                1.38
Standard       3               0.600                2.07
Old style      4               0.093                0.42
Standard       6               0.245                0.84
Heavy          6               0.368                1.26


TABLE XXXVI--DIMENSIONS AND WEIGHT OF KAHN RIB METAL.

Size            Section area            Weight per
No.          per ft. width sq. ins.    sq. ft. lbs.

2                    0.54                  2.13
3                    0.36                  1.43
4                    0.27                  1.08
5                    0.22                  0.87
6                    0.18                  0.72
7                    0.15                  0.62
8                    0.14                  0.55


TABLE XXXVII--WEIGHTS OF DEFORMED BARS OF DIMENSIONS COMMONLY USED FOR
REINFORCED CONCRETE.

Size.     Weight, lbs.     Area.       Size     Weight, lbs.     Area
 ins.      per ft.        sq. ins.      ins.      per ft.      sq. ins.

[Illustration: Ransome Twisted Bar.]  [Illustration: New Style Corrugated Bar.]

  ¼          0.212         0.063          ¼         0.24          0.06
  ½          0.85          0.25           ½         0.85          0.25
5/8          1.32          0.319         5/8        1.33          0.39
  ¾          1.91          0.563          ¾         1.91          0.56
7/8          2.6           0.765         7/8        2.60          0.77
1            3.4           1.000         1          3.40          1.00
1¼           5.3           1.563         1¼         5.30          1.56

 [Illustration: Diamond Bar.]        [Illustration: Universal Corrugated Bar.]
  ½          0.85          0.25         ¼×1       0.73          0.19
5/8          1.33          0.39      5/16×1¼      1.18          0.32
  ¾          1.91          0.56       3/8×1-3/8   1.35          0.41
7/8          2.60          0.76       3/8×1¾      1.97          0.54
1            3.40          1.00       3/8×2       2.27          0.65
1¼           5.31          1.56       3/8×2½      2.85          0.80

  --No. 1 Mill--  [Illustration: Thatcher Bulb Bar.]   --No. 2 Mill.--
  ¼          0.16          0.047         ...        ...           ...
  ½          0.61          0.18            ½        0.58          0.17
5/8          0.95          0.28          5/8        0.92          0.27
  ¾          1.39          0.41            ¾        1.34          0.39
7/8          1.87          0.55          7/8        1.79          0.53
1            2.42          0.71          1          2.32          0.68
1¼           3.74          1.10          1¼         3.55          1.04
1½           5.30          1.56          1½         5.20          1.53
1¾           7.07          2.08         ....        ....          ....
2            9.02          2.65         ....        ....          ....

[Illustration: Monolith Bar.]    [Illustration: Twisted Lug Bar.]

0.4          0.55          0.25            ¼        0.222         0.625
  ½          0.85          0.32            ½        0.87          0.250
...          ....          ....          5/8        1.35          0.3906
...          ....          ....            ¾        1.94          0.5625
0.8          2.18          0.64          7/8        2.64          0.7656
1            3.37          1.00          1          3.45          1.00
...          ....          ....          1¼         5.37          1.5625
1½           7.75          2.25          1½         7.70          2.25


                       [Illustration: Cup Bar]

                  3/8           0.48            ....
                  ½             0.86            ....
                  5/8           1.35            ....
                  ¾             1.95            ....
                  7/8           2.65            ....
                1               3.46            ....
                1-1/8           4.38            ....
                1¼              4.51            ....

~RECIPES FOR COLORING MORTARS.~--The following recipes for coloring cement
mortar have been found reliable; the weights given being weight of
coloring matter per bag of cement and for a 1-2 mortar:

_Brown Stone_: 4 to 5 lbs. brown ochre or ½ lb. best quality roasted
iron oxide.

_Buff Stone_: 4 lbs. yellow ochre.

_Red Stone_: 5 lbs. raw violet iron oxide.

_Bright Red Stone_: 5½ to 7 lbs. English or Pompeiian red.

_Blue Stone_: 2 lbs. ultramarine blue.

_Dark Blue Stone_: 4 lbs. ultramarine blue.

_Slate_: Lamp black ½ lb. light slate; 4 lbs. dark blue slate.

_Light Terra Cotta_: 2 lbs. Chattanooga iron ore.




CHAPTER XXV.

METHODS AND COST OF WATERPROOFING CONCRETE STRUCTURES.


Resistance to penetration by water is desirable in all concrete
structures, and is essential in such structures as tanks, reservoirs,
vaults, subways, basements and roofs. Concrete, as it is ordinarily
made, is pervious to water, hence to secure concrete structures through
which water will not penetrate some method of waterproofing the concrete
must be employed. Many methods have been proposed and are being used;
none of these methods is without faults, the best one of them has not
yet been determined, and the evidence available as to their comparative
merits is biased and conflicting. For these reasons any discussion of
waterproofing for concrete is at the present time bound to be
unsatisfactory.

Methods of waterproofing may be roughly classified as follows: (1) Use
of mixtures so proportioned as to be impervious; (2) admixture of
substances designed to produce impermeability; (3) use of waterproof
coatings, washes or diaphragms. In succeeding sections enough examples
of each method are given to indicate current practice; no attempt has
been made to catalog all the waterproofing substances and systems being
promoted--there are too many of them.

The art of waterproofing concrete is in a transition stage. Outside of
the manufacturers of waterproofing material the art has received serious
study by comparatively few persons. No comparative tests by independent
investigators are available. Practical experience with most of the
materials used has not extended over a long enough period of time to
permit true conclusions to be drawn. Students of the subject are not
even agreed upon the broad questions whether it is better to work toward
developing an impervious concrete or toward perfecting a waterproof
covering for concrete. On the minor subdivisions there is no agreement
at all.

In the present state of the art one can lay fast hold to only three
things. The first is that waterproofing is one component of a system of
drainage; the second is that structures must, to get the best results,
be designed with the fact in mind that waterproofing is a component
structural element, and the third is that skilled and conscientious
workmanship are essential elements in the success of all waterproofing
materials and methods.

~IMPERVIOUS CONCRETE MIXTURES.~--The compounding of the regular concrete
materials so as to produce an impervious concrete has been made the
subject of numerous experiments. The most elaborate of these experiments
were those conducted over a period of five years by Mr. Feret, of the
Boulogne (France) Laboratory of the Ponts et Chaussees. Feret's
experiments led him to the following conclusions:

"That in all mortars of granulometric composition the most permeable are
those which contain the least quantity of cement.

"Of all mortars of the same richness, but of varying granulometric
composition, those which contain very few fine grains are much more
permeable. They are the more so where, with equal proportions of the
fine grains, the coarse grains predominate more in relation to the
grains of medium size.

"The minimum permeability is found in mortars where the proportion of
medium-sized grains is small, and the coarse and fine grains are about
equal to each other."

Mr. Feret also found that permeability decreased with time and that wet
mixtures were less permeable than dry mixtures.

Tests made by Messrs. J. B. McIntyre and A. L. True at the Thayer School
of Civil Engineering in 1902 gave the following results:

All the specimens composed of 1-1 mortar in the proportions of 30, 35,
40 and 45 per cent. of the whole mass were impermeable. Some of the
specimens composed of 1-2 mortar in the proportions of 40 and 45 per
cent. were also impermeable, as well as the 1-2-4 and 1-2½-4 mixtures.
All other mixtures leaked at the high pressure (80 lbs. per sq. in.) and
in a general way exhibited a degree of imperviousness in direct
proportion to the proportion of mortar in them, with the lower
pressures from 20 lbs. per sq. in. up as well as for the 80-lb.
pressure.

Other tests confirm those cited. In general we may conclude that those
mixtures richest in cement and mortar are the most impervious. It is
doubtless practicable by exercising proper care to proportion, mix and
place a concrete mixture which will be so nearly impervious that visible
leakage will be small. The task, however, is one difficult to perform in
actual construction work, and its accomplishment is never certain.

~STAR STETTIN CEMENT.~--Star Stettin cement is a Portland cement made by
grinding a clinker which has been "impregnated" with substances which
impart waterproofing properties to the ground product. The process is
the invention of Richard Liebold, and the cement is made by the Star
Stettin Portland Cement Works, Stettin, Germany. It is asserted that a
1-4 fine sand mortar made with this cement is impervious. To use it the
ordinary precautions adopted in the employment of Portland cement are
necessary, and in addition the following: The cement must be mixed with
moist instead of dry sand before the water is added; the sand should be
clean, sharp and fine of grain; the mortar must be more perfectly mixed
than ordinarily, and somewhat more water should be used than is
ordinarily used. Perfectly even mixing is essential to the best results.

~MEDUSA WATERPROOFING COMPOUND.~--This compound is a dry powder which is
mixed with the cement in proportions of from 1 per cent. to 2 per cent.
by weight, or from 4 lbs. to 8 lbs. per barrel of cement. The compound
costs 12 cts. per lb., so that its addition increases the cost from 48
to 96 cts. per barrel of cement. Thorough mixing of the compound with
the cement is of the utmost importance, otherwise none but the ordinary
precautions in the use of Portland cement is necessary. Absorption tests
on concrete blocks treated and untreated with the compound and nine
months old have shown the absorbtion of treated blocks to be about
one-fourth or one-fifth that of untreated blocks. The compound is made
by the Sandusky Portland Cement Co., Sandusky, Ohio.

~NOVOID WATERPROOFING COMPOUND.~--This compound is a dry powder which is
mixed dry with the cement in the proportion of 1 to 2 per cent. by
weight or about 1 to 2 lbs. per bag of cement. The compound costs 12
cts. per pound or about from 48 to 96 cts. per barrel of cement.
Directions for making waterproofing mortar are: To 100 lbs. of Portland
cement add 2 to 2½ lbs. of compound and 200 lbs. of clean and sharp sand
and mix the materials dry and very thoroughly. The water is then added
in the proportion necessary to make a good working mortar and the mortar
mixed and applied in the ordinary manner. Used as a wash 2 lbs. of
compound are thoroughly mixed dry with a bag of cement. Any portion of
the mixture is then mixed with water to produce a creamy grout, which is
applied to a thoroughly wet surface with a brush. This compound is made
by The Abbey-Dodge-Brooks Concrete Co., Newark, N. J.

~IMPERMEABLE COATINGS AND WASHES.~--The most common means employed for
rendering concrete structures waterproof is to coat or wash the surface
with some substance itself impervious to water or having the property of
closing the pores of the surface skin of concrete so that water cannot
penetrate.

~Bituminous Coatings.~--Bituminous coatings of one composition or another
are among the most commonly used of impermeable coatings. The bituminous
compound is used both alone and in combination with layers of a fabric
of some sort to form the coating. Where bituminous coatings are used on
surfaces exposed to the sun and frost attention must be given to the
fact that a compound of different properties is required where the range
of temperature is great than is required where this range is smaller.
Asphalt, for example, should have a flow point of 212° F. and a brittle
point of -15° F. when exposed directly to sun and frost as compared with
say a flow point of 185° F. and a brittle point of 0° F. when covered
from the direct action of sun and frost. Another point to be kept in
mind particularly in using exterior coatings is that the concrete
surface must be properly prepared to receive the coating or else it
will peel off. The following are examples from actual practice of
waterproofing with bituminous coatings.

The following method of waterproofing with asphalt coating is given by
W. H. Finley: The asphalt used must be of the best grade, free from coal
tar or any of its products, and must not volatilize more than 0.5 per.
cent, under a temperature of 100° F. for 10 hours. It must not be
affected by a 20 per cent. solution of ammonia, a 35 per cent. solution
of hydrochloric acid, a 25 per cent. solution of sulphuric acid, or a
saturated solution of sodium chloride. For structures underground a flow
point of 185° F. and a brittle point of 0° F. shall be required. If the
surface cannot be made dry and warm it should first be coated with an
asphalt paint made of asphalt reduced with naphtha. The asphalt should
be heated in a kettle to a temperature not exceeding 450° F. It has been
cooked enough when a piece of wood can be inserted and withdrawn without
the asphalt clinging to it. The first coat should consist of a thin
layer poured from buckets on the prepared surface and thoroughly mopped
over. The second coat should consist of a mixture of clean sand and
screenings, free from earthy admixtures, previously heated and dried,
and asphalt, in the proportion of 1 of asphalt to 3 or 4 of sand or
screenings by volume. This is to be thoroughly mixed in the kettle and
then spread out on the surface with warm smoothing irons, such as are
used in laying asphalt streets. The finishing coat should consist of
pure hot asphalt spread thinly and evenly over the entire surface, and
then sprinkled with washed roofing gravel, torpedo sand, or stone
screenings, to harden the top. The thickness of the coating will depend
on the character of the work and may vary from ¾ in. to 2 ins. in
thickness.

Several firms manufacture and sell ready made priming paints and mastics
for waterproofing concrete by substantially the above method. Sarco
compounds made by the Standard Asphalt & Rubber Co., of Chicago, Ill.,
are examples. Sarco waterproofing is a compound analyzing 99.7 per cent.
pure bitumen and having a range of ductility of 200° F. In waterproofing
large car barn roofs of concrete in Chicago, the concrete was first
swept clean and a coat of priming compound was thoroughly brushed in. On
the priming coat was mopped a coat of waterproofing compound, applied
hot, and covered with a layer of fine sand. The thickness of the
completed coating was 1/16 in. Where a heavier waterproofing is
necessary the waterproofing compound is covered with one or more 5/8-in.
coats of Sarco mastic.

The following bituminous coatings have been used in waterproofing
concrete fortifications by the U. S. Army Engineers:

_Mobile, Ala._--The top of the concrete was covered with a thin coat of
1-2 cement mortar and given a rough trowel finish. As soon as the
surface was dry it was covered with a layer of asphalt mastic 1 in.
thick and rubbed down to a finish with dry sand and cement in equal
parts. To prepare the mastic take 500 lbs. of Diamond T asphalt mastic,
broken into small pieces, 30 lbs. of Diamond T asphalt flux, and 5 lbs.
of petroleum residuum oil. When thoroughly melted add 400 lbs. clean,
dry torpedo gravel previously heated. Stir gravel and asphalt until
thoroughly mixed at a temperature of about 375° F.

_Key West, Fla._--The top of the concrete was covered with smooth
plaster, proper slope for drainage being given. Above this two layers of
asphalt of an aggregate thickness of ¾ in. were applied. The composition
of the asphalt was as follows: 440 lbs. rock asphalt mastic, 3 gallons
coal tar, and 5 gallons silicious sand.

_Delaware River Defenses._--The concrete was waterproofed with coal tar
and sand. The tar was made hot and applied to the surfaces with rubber
squeegees and then sanded. Joints were filled with the hot tar. A
surplus of sand was left on for a few days and then swept off. One
barrel of coal tar covered 2,279 sq. ft. with one coat and cost $4.25
per barrel delivered. The cost including material and labor was 0.74 ct.
per sq. ft.

_San Francisco Harbor._--The roof had a pitch of about 3 in 20 and was
covered with an earth fill. The concrete was troweled to a fairly smooth
surface, was mopped with a heavy coat of roofing asphaltum, or mastic,
then covered with the heaviest grade roofing felt laid 3 ply, starting
at the coping of the parade wall and made 4 ply in the gutter. On this
assumed watertight surface 3-in. book tile was laid with joints normal
to the gutter and cemented. The purpose of the tile was to afford a free
passage for the water as soon as it met the roof. The expectations were
fully realized and no water, or even a sign of moisture, has appeared in
this battery, or at another of the same type since built, after a fair
test of time.

The total cost of the work, including mastic, felt and tile, was 17 cts.
per sq. ft. for 6,200 sq. ft. covering three roofs.

In conclusion it may be noted that any of the methods of constructing
impermeable diaphragms can be used for constructing impermeable
coatings.

~Szerelmey Stone Liquid Wash.~--This wash has been used in England for
waterproofing and preserving masonry for some 20 years. It is a thin
liquid compound which is applied to the surface with a brush. The stone
or concrete surface is required to be dry and thoroughly clean, with all
scale and loose particles removed. The standard treatment is three
coats; 1 gallon of liquid is in most cases sufficient for treating
(three coats) 25 sq. yds., but in exceptionally bad cases 1 gallon for
15 sq. yds. has been found necessary. The precautions necessary for the
successful use of the liquid are: It must be well stirred; it must be
applied to a perfectly dry, clean surface, and it must be well rubbed
into the masonry. The American agency for the liquid is Szerelmey & Co.,
Washington, D. C.

~Sylvester Wash.~--Waterproofing with Sylvester wash consists in applying
alternately to the concrete surface a soap solution wash and an alum
solution wash. The soap solution is applied first, and it must be
applied hot and to a dry surface; the alum solution is applied second
and 24 hours after the soap solution and is applied cold. This
constitutes one treatment. After 24 hours a second treatment may be
given, and as many treatments may be given as necessary. In some cases
as many as six treatments have been employed. The proportions of the
solutions used in practice vary. In waterproofing the standpipe
described in Chapter XXII the soap solution consisted of 12 oz. pure
Castile olive oil soap per gallon of water, and the alum solution
consisted of 2 oz. of alum per gallon of water. In repairing the bottom
of a reservoir lined with 4 to 6 ins. of concrete the following
solutions were used: ¾ lb. Olean soap to 1 gallon of water and ½ lb.
alum to 4 gallons of water. Both alum and soap were well dissolved and
the soap solution was boiled. The boiling hot soap solution was applied
on the clean, dry concrete; 24 hours later the alum wash was applied
cold. This treatment was repeated after 24 hours. Two men applied the
solutions, using whitewash brushes, while a third man carried pails of
the solution. In making the soap solution two men attended four kettles,
one man kept up fires, two men carried solution to men applying it. The
alum solution required fewer men, being made cold in barrels. After
applying the second soap wash to the concrete slopes, the men had to be
held by ropes to keep from slipping. The rope was placed around two men,
who started work at the top of the slope, a third man paying out the
rope. The work was done in 8½ days and cost as follows:

Labor:
1,140 hours labor at 15 cts.        $171.00
83 hours foreman at 30 cts.           24.90
83 hours waterboy at 6 cts.            4.98
Add for superintendence 15%           30.13
                                    -------
  Total labor                       $231.01
  Materials:
900 lbs. Olean soap at 4-1/3 cts.   $ 39.00
210 lbs. alum at 3 cts.                6.30
6 10-in. whitewash brushes at $2.25   13.50
6 stable brushes at $1.25              7.50
                                    -------
  Total materials                   $ 66.30
  Total labor and materials         $297.31

This covered 131,634 sq. ft., hence the cost of the two coats of soap
and alum was $2.26 per 1,000 sq. ft., or 0.23 ct. per sq. ft.

The ordinary Sylvester wash, as described above, has been modified with
success on Government fortification work as follows: To 2 gals. of water
add 1 lb. concentrated lye and 5 lbs. alum and mix until completely
dissolved. This is a concentrated stock solution. In use 1 pt. of
solution and 10 lbs. of cement are mixed with enough water to make a
mixture that will lather freely under the brush. Two coats of this wash
are applied, the second at any time after the first is dry, and the
first as soon as the forms are removed from the concrete. The wash
should be applied to a wet surface, if the concrete is dry it should be
wet down with a brush ahead of the wash.

~Sylvester Mortars.~--In this class of coatings the alum and soap are
added to the mortar which is used for facing. A successful recipe for
such a mortar is given as follows: To 1 part cement and 2 parts sand add
¾ lb. of pulverized alum for each cubic foot of sand and mix these
ingredients dry; then add the proper quantity of water, in which has
been dissolved ¾ lb. of soap to the gallon, and mix the mortar
thoroughly. Such a mortar is but slightly inferior in strength to
ordinary mortar of the same proportions. In plastering a clear water
well to prevent leaking a 1-2 mortar was made as follows: 1¼ lbs. of
soap were dissolved in 15 gallons of water and 3 lbs. of powdered alum
were mixed with 1 bag of cement. Two coats of plaster of an aggregate
thickness of ½ in. were applied and completely stopped the leaking. The
cost of this treatment was as follows:

2 lbs. soap (with 24 gals. water) at 7½ cts.     $0.15
12 lbs. alum at 3½ cts.                           0.42
                                                ------
Total per barrel of cement                       $0.57

In lining a new reservoir near Wilmerding, Pa., a mortar was made as
follows: A stock solution of 2 lbs. caustic potash and 5 lbs. alum to 10
quarts of water was made in barrel lots, from which 3 quarts were taken
for each batch of 2 bags of cement and 4 bags of sand. A batch of mortar
covered an area 6×8 ft. with a 1-in. coat. The extra cost of the
waterproofing was:

100 lbs. caustic potash at 10 cts.      $10.00
70 lbs. caustic potash at 9 cts.          6.30
960 lbs. alum at 3½, 3¾ and 4 cts.       34.38
60 hours mixing at 15 cts.                9.00
Freight, express and haulage             11.50
                                        ------
  Total for 74,800 sq. ft.              $71.18

This gives a cost of 95 cts. per 1,000 sq. ft., or less than 0.1 ct. per
sq. ft. It was found that if less than 2 parts of sand to 1 part of
cement was used the mortar cracked badly in setting. Clean sand was
imperative, as any organic impurities soon decomposed, leaving soft
spots. Do not use an excess of potash; a slight excess of alum, however,
does not decrease the strength of the mortar.

~Hydrolithic Coating.~--This waterproofing is a dry mortar composed by
mixing a cementing compound with sand, and sold dry in sacks containing
96 lbs. each. The dry mortar is mixed with water to proper consistency
for plastering, and is applied as a plaster to the surfaces to be
waterproofed. The dry mortar is mixed with water to a grout of the
consistency of thick cream and then this grout is stiffened to the
proper consistency by adding more dry mortar. Thoroughness of mixing is
absolutely essential. The concrete surface is prepared by picking and
scoring sufficiently to get a fresh surface and washing away all chips,
dust and loose material, or instead of picking in new work the outer
skin may be removed by a 1 to 9 muriatic acid solution and then washed
free of all acid and scrubbed with wire brushes. After preparing the
fresh surface it is well wetted; in fact water soaked, so that, while
not oozing moisture it will absorb no more water. The mixed mortar is
then applied with a trowel in a workmanlike manner. In mixing, no more
than 8 gallons of water per barrel of mortar should be used. The
coatings used are 3/8 to 5/8 in. for walls and ½ to ¾ in. for floors.
The following estimate of cost is made by the manufacturers, the E. J.
Winslow Co., Chicago, Ill. The figures are presented with the
understanding that they are to be considered merely as average costs for
waterproofing, without special construction, and subject to change in
accordance with local conditions, and to the time of year when the work
will need to be performed:

                                                              Per sq. ft.
To prepare surfaces to receive "coating" may
    cost the contractor                                        5½ cts.
The coating material, f. o. b. Chicago, may
    cost the contractor                                        4½ cts.
The labor of application may cost the contractor               7½ cts.
Administration and incidental expenses may
    cost the contractor                                        7½ cts.
                                                              --------
                                                              25  cts.

The lowest price yet asked for work was 20 cts., and the highest, 55
cts., these two prices representing the opposite extremes of conditions
that different jobs will present.

~Cement Mortar Coatings.~--Rich cement mortar mixtures offer considerable
resistance to penetration by water and when well made may be used with a
fair degree of success to waterproof ordinary concrete. European
engineers make wide use of mortar coatings for waterproofing tanks and
reservoirs and appear to have good success with them. The experience in
this country is that no great reliance can be placed on them, where the
pressures are at all large. Records of work done show both successes and
failures, with no apparent reason for either so far as composition of
mortar or quality of workmanship goes. A rich mortar plaster will reduce
leakage, and may prevent it entirely, but it is uncertain how far it
will prove water tight.

~Oil and Paraffin Washes.~--The theory of the use of oil and paraffin
washes is that the material soaks into the concrete and closes the
surface pores against the penetration of water. Paraffin has been quite
widely used for preserving stone masonry walls for buildings. It is
applied hot, and in the best practice is applied to a dry heated
surface. Concerns doing such work on buildings have portable devices for
heating the masonry. Oil is sometimes applied hot but is more often
flushed onto the surface and allowed to soak in as it will.

~IMPERMEABLE DIAPHRAGMS.~--The most generally employed method of
waterproofing concrete structures, with the possible exception of
painting and coating methods, is to embed in the wall, roof and floor
slabs a diaphragm that is impervious to water. Such diaphragms are
usually composed of layers of waterproof felt or paper cemented together
and to the concrete by asphalt, coal tar pitch or patented cementing
compound. Another construction consists of a layer of asphaltic compound
between two layers of cement mortar. In some cases also the combination
felt and cementing compound diaphragm is further strengthened by placing
it between layers of mortar. In wall work the diaphragm is frequently
applied to the face of a single layer brick wall and the concrete filled
against it. The brick wall may be further waterproofed by laying the
brick in hot asphalt instead of in mortar.

Within the last few years a number of firms have devoted their efforts
to producing special fabrics (felts or papers) and special cementing
compounds designed to be used with the fabrics for waterproofing
concrete. These fabrics and cements are in most cases superior in
toughness, flexibility, ease of application, etc., to the ordinary
roofing and waterproofing fabrics designed originally for general
building purposes.

~Long Island R. R. Subway.~--In constructing the Long Island R. R. subway
the roof was waterproofed according to specifications as follows: After
the roof concrete was crowned, brought to a smooth surface and
thoroughly dried, it was swabbed over with hot melted "medium hard" coal
tar pitch to an even thickness of not less than 1-16 in. Immediately
upon the first coat of pitch and while it was still melted was laid a
covering of single-ply roofing felt, with the sheets lapping 4 ins. on
all cross joints and 12 ins. on longitudinal joints. This felt was in
turn mopped with pitch, and upon that again was laid another layer of
roofing felt, which was given a final coating of pitch. The pitch used
was of a grade somewhat softer than that used for roofing purposes, or
such as would soften at a temperature of 60° F. and melt at a
temperature of 100° F. The felt used consisted of pure wood paper pulp
or asbestos pulp, which had been thoroughly treated and soaked in
refined coal tar and which weighed for single ply at least 15 lbs. per
100 sq. ft.

After the waterproofing with pitch and felt had thoroughly hardened it
was plastered over with a trowel with a 1-in. layer of Portland cement
mortar, laid in uniform squares, in every respect similar to the plaster
on top of granolithic pavement. The dimensions of the squares were 5×5
ft. Their purpose was to take up expansion and contraction in the
coating.

During the year 1903, there were laid 9,056 sq. yds. of the
waterproofing described. The labor cost of placing the two layers of
felt and the three coats of pitch was as follows: 206 days labor at a
cost of $498 (or an average of $2.41 per day) for the 9.056 sq. yds.,
which is equivalent to 5½ cts. per sq. yd. for labor. Since this is for
two layers of felt the labor cost was 2¾ cts. per sq. yd. of single
layer. The labor cost of mixing and placing the 1-in. mortar covering
was as follows: It required 589 days at a cost of $1,306 (or an average
of $2.22 per day) to place 9,056 sq. yds., which is equivalent to 14½
cts. per sq. yd. The total cost of labor for two layers of tar felt and
the layer of cement mortar was, therefore, 20 cts. per sq. yd.

~New York Rapid Transit Subway.~--The waterproofing consisted of alternate
layers of asbestos felt and asphalt laid on the concrete and covered
with concrete. A coat of hot asphalt was laid on the concrete and on
this a layer of felt, then another coat of asphalt and another layer of
felt, and so on until the required number of layers of felt, from 2 to
6, were laid with asphalt between and on top and bottom. Natural asphalt
containing not less than 95 per cent bitumen was specified. The felt was
required to weigh 10 lbs. per 100 sq. ft. In constructing sidewalls the
alternative was allowed of placing the waterproofing layer between a
4-in. outside wall of brick laid in asphalt and the concrete lining. On
two sections of the work the actual cost of waterproofing was as
follows:

  98,074 sq. yds. Single-Ply Felt.    Per sq. yd.
Labor laying                                $0.05
Materials and plant                          0.10
                                            ------
  Total                                     $0.15

  1,337 cu. yds. Brick in Asphalt:    Per cu. yd.

Labor laying                                $6.32
Materials and plant                         11.48
                                            ------
  Total                                    $17.80




INDEX.



A
                               Page

Abutment Construction
  Cost of
    Bridges Over City Streets 254
    Ernst St. Bridge, Cincinnati, O. 257
    Kansas City Outer Belt & Electric Ry. 253
    Lonesome Valley Viaduct 256
    Railway Bridge 106
  Methods of
    Bridges over City Streets 253
    Illinois & Mississippi Canal 196, 197
    Lonesome Valley Viaduct 254, 255
    Railway Bridge 105, 250
    Summary of 230

Aggregates
  Balanced, Value of 14
  Broken Stone 13
  Cinders 14
  Cost of 15
  Gravel 14
  Heating (See Heating Aggregates)
  Kinds Used 13
  Measuring, Methods of 42
    Open Box 42, 50
    Trump Automatic Measurer 44
  Quantities in Concrete, Test Determinations 192
  Screened or Crusher Run, Stone for 15
  Sizes Used 15
  Slag 14
  Voids in 25
  Weighing, Apparatus for 102

Aqueduct Construction
  Cost of
    Cedar Grove Reservoir 549, 550
    Salt River Irrigation Work 540
  Methods of
    Cast Pipe Swansea, England 584
    Cedar Grove Reservoir 545
    Jersey City Water Supply 544
    Salt River Irrigation Works 538
    Torresdale Filters 540

Asphalt Concrete
  Definition of 108
  Furnace for Heating 109, 110
  Machine Mixing of 111

Asphalt Concrete Construction
  Cost of
    Base for Mill Floor 110, 111
    Slope Paving for Dam 109
  Methods of
    Base for Mill Floor
    Slope Paving for Dam 108, 109

B

Bags (See Cement Bags)
  Depositing Concrete Under Water 89, 90

Barrels (See Cement Barrels)

Belt Conveyors
  Capacity of 65
  Gas Works Foundations, Astoria, N. Y. 64
  Horse Power Required 65

Bench Monuments
  Construction of 656
  Cost of 657

Blasting Concrete 655

Bonding New Concrete to Old 659

Breakwater Construction
  Cost of
    Buffalo, N. Y. 214
    Marquette, Mich. 209, 212
  Methods of
    Buffalo, N. Y. 212, 214
    Marquette, Mich. 208, 212

Bridge Centers (See Centers)

Bridge Construction
  Cost of
    Arch Viaduct 373
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge 392, 397
    Elkhart, Ind., Arch 398
    Five Span Arch 407
    Girder Highway 377, 379
    Grand Rapids Bridge 410, 413
    Molded Slab Girders 387
    Plainwell, Mich., Arch 399
    Railway Bridge 375
  Methods of
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge 387
    Elkhart, Ind., Arch 397
    Five Span Arch 400
    Girder Highway 367, 377
    Grand Rapids, Mich., Arch 407
    Molded Slab Girders 384
    Plainwell, Mich., Arch 398

Bridge Pier Construction
  Cost of
    Calf Killer River Bridge 243, 245
    City Island Bridge 236
    Miami River Bridge 257
    Steel Cylinder 241
    Viaducts, Cincinnati, O. 258
    Williamsburg Bridge  230, 231
  Methods of
    Calf Killer River Bridge 241, 245
    City Island Bridge 235
    K. C., M. & O. Ry. 245, 250
    Lonesome Valley Viaduct 254, 255
    Miami River Bridge 256
    Nova Scotia Railways 108
    Railway Bridge 231, 235
    Scottish Railways 107, 108
    Summary of 230
    Tharsis & Calamas Ry. 106, 107
    Williamsburg Bridge 237, 241

Broken Stone
  Crushing (See Stone Crushing)
  Quarrying (See Quarrying)
  Rocks for, Best 13
  Shoveling (See Shoveling)
  Screened or Crusher Run 15
  Voids in
    Amount of 29, 30
    Effect of Granulometric Composition 30
    Effect of Hauling 33, 34
    Effect of Loading 29
    Variation, Causes of 28
    Weight no Index 32
  Weight of 32, 33

Building Construction
  Cost of
    Four-Story Garage 510
    Wall Columns for Power Station 490
    Walls for Factory Building 507
  Divisions of Work 433
  Methods of
    Four-Story Garage 509
    One-Story Car Barn 495
    Six-Story Building 491
    Wall Columns 488
    Walls for Factory Building 505


C

Cableways
  Capacity of 64
  Construction of Bridge Work 369
  Cost of 64
  Fortification Work 186
  Retaining Wall Work 269

Cars
  Mixer Charging 72

Carts (See Concrete Carts, Horse Carts)

Cement
  Classification of 1
  Natural Definition of 2
  Portland, Definition of 1
  Quantity in Concrete
    Formula for Computing 37
    Rule for Figuring 40
    Tables Showing 39, 40, 41
  Quantity in Mortar
    Formula for Computing 36
    Tables Showing 38
    Test Determinations 40, 41
    Theory of 35
  Shrinkage by Wetting 35
  Slag, Definition of 2
  Weight 2, 4

Cement Bags
  Capacity of 2
  Packing for Shipment 3
  Rebate on 3
  Storage House for 3

Cement Barrels
  Capacity of 2, 3, 4
  Dimensions of 4

Cement Specifications 4

Cement Testing, Cost of 4

Centers
  Computation of
    Luten Arch 566
  Construction of
    Conditions Governing 363
    Cocket, 50 ft. Span 364
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge 392
    Five Span Arch 400
    Grand Rapids Bridge 408
    Luten Arch 365
    Mechanicsville Bridge 365
    Parabolic Arch 366
    Supported, 50 ft. Span 364
    Walnut Lane Bridge 368
  Cost of
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge 392, 393
  Deflection of
    Test Determinations 367
  Types of 363

Charging Barrows
  Ransome, Description 71
  Sterling, Description 71

Charging Buckets
  Wheeled 74

Charging Mixer
  Cost of 270, 272
    Gravity from Bins 69
  Methods of
    Car Plants 72
    Charging Barrows 70, 71
    Derricks and Buckets 73
    Elevating Charging Hoppers 70
    Enumeration 68
    Gravity from Bins 68, 69
    Shoveling 72, 73
    Wheelbarrows 70
  Wheeled Bucket for 74

Chutes
  Cement Bag, Construction of 65
  Concrete. Examples of 66, 67, 68
  Working Gradients 65, 66

Cinders 15

Cofferdam Construction
  Cost of Bridge Pier 232

Coloring Concrete, Recipes for 666

Colors for Mortar, Recipes for 666

Concrete
  Asphalt (See Asphalt Concrete)
  Definition of 1
  Depositing (See Depositing Concrete)
  Mixers (See Mixers)
  Mixing (See Mixing Concrete)
  Proportioning, Methods of 25

Concrete Bucket
  Side Dumping 486
  Subaqueous
    Cyclopean 87
    O'Rourke 86
    Stuebner 88

Concrete Block
  Molding (See Molding Concrete Blocks)
  Sling for Handling 216

Concrete Cars
  Lock Work, Coosa River 195

Concrete Carts
  Hand, Capacity of 53, 54
  Horse, Briggs 298
  Ransome Two-Wheeled 53

Culvert Construction
  Characteristics of 414
  Cost of
    Arch 26 ft. Span 425
    Arch, N., C. & St. L. Ry. 418, 419, 422
    Kalamazoo, Mich. 430
    Kansas City Outer Belt & Electric Ry. 252
    Pennsylvania R. R. 424
  Methods of
    Arch, N., C. & St. L. Ry. 417
    Arch, Wabash Ry. 422
    Box, C., B. & Q. R. R. 414
    Kalamazoo, Mich. 427
    Pennsylvania R. R. 423

Curb and Gutter Construction
  Cost of
    Champaign, Ill. 326
    Estimating 321
    Ottawa. Ont. 324
Methods of
    Champaign, Ill. 325
    General Discussion 321
    Kinds of 318
    Ottawa, Ont. 321

Curbing, Wood for Shafts 160, 161


D

Dam Construction
  Cost of
    Hemet 104
    Richmond, Ind. 224
    Rock Island, Ill. 225
    Spier Falls 103
  Methods of
    Barossa Dam  101
    Boonton, N. J., Dam 103
    Boyds Corner Dam 105
    Chaudiere Falls, Quebec 228
    Chattahoochee River Dam 100
    Hemet Dam 103, 104
    McCall Ferry, Pa. 225, 228
    Richmond, Ind. 223
    Rock Island, Ill. 224, 225
    Spier Falls Dam 103
    Water Works Reservoir 104

Depositing Concrete
  Subaqueous
    Bags
      Bridge Foundations 91
      Marquette Breakwater 209, 210
      Peterhead Pier 89, 90
    Buckets
      Marquette Breakwater. 208, 209
    Pier Construction 222
    Characteristics of 86
    Closed Buckets 86, 87, 88
    Tremie
      Charlestown Bridge Foundations 92, 93
      Masonry Bridge Foundations, France 93, 94
      Harvard Bridge Foundations 91
      Nussdorf Lock Foundations 94, 95

Drilling Concrete, Drill Mounting for 653

Dumping Concrete
  Cost of
    Wheelbarrows 55
  Methods of
    Chutes 55
    Wheelbarrows 55

Dump Wagons for Transporting Concrete 54


E

Efflorescence
  Causes of 126
  Preventing, Methods of 126, 127
  Removing, Cost of 127

Ejecters for Washing Sand 7

Erecting Derrick
  Cost of Bridge Pier 232

Erecting Forms
  Derrick for 501
  Directions for Building Work 460

Erecting Molded Columns
  Cost of 520
  Methods of 520

Erecting Molded Roof Slabs
  Cost of 522

Excavating Cofferdams
  Cost of 232, 244, 250


F

Fabricating Reinforcement
  Bending Machine for 468
  Bending Tables for 466
  Methods of
    Building Work 464
    Five Span Arch Bridge 402

Falseworks in Form Construction 144

Finishing Concrete Surfaces
  Methods of
    Acid Etching and Washing 133
    Careful Mixing and Placing
    Concrete 125, 126
    Coloring 135
    Form Construction 124, 125
    Grout Washing 130
    Mortar Facing  128, 129
    Plastering 128
    Scrubbing and Washing 131, 132, 133, 134
    Spading and Troweling 127, 128
    Special Facing Mixtures 130
    Stuccoing 128
    Tooling 133, 134
    Washed Gravel or Pebble 134

Form Construction
  Cost of
    Aqueduct, Cedar Grove Reservoir 550
    Arch Culverts 418, 419, 422, 425, 430
    Battery Emplacement 188
    Bridge Abutment 257
    Bridge  233, 235, 250
    Bridge Pier Work 243
    Building Work 493, 496, 501, 503, 507, 511
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge 392, 393
    Dam Rock Island, Ill. 225
    Effect of Design on 137
    Estimating, Method of 146, 147, 148, 149
    Girder for Separate Casting 517
    Girder Highway Bridge 377, 380, 382
    Grand Rapids Bridge 412
    Guard Lock, Ill., & Miss. Canal 201
    Gun Emplacements 185
    Lock, Coosa River 196
    Lock, Ill. & Miss. Canal 202, 206, 207
    Mortar Battery Platform 187
    Permanent Way  Structures 252
    Piers for Taintor Gates 198
    Pier Superior Entry, Wis. 222
    Reservoir for Fire Protection 591, 592, 593
    Retaining Walls 273, 275
    Retaining Wall Work 270, 272
    Slab and I-Beam Floors 450
    Subway Lining 362
    Economics of 136
    Falseworks and Bracing 144, 145
  Methods of
    Aqueduct, Cedar Grove Reservoir 546
    Aqueduct Torresdale Filters 541
    Arch Culvert 427
    Arch Culverts 421
    Blocks for Lake Pier 216
    Blocks Molded Under Water 217-219
    Box Culverts 417
    Bridge Piers 255
    Building Work 492, 495
    Cement Pipe Molded in Place 577
    Circular Columns 445
    Columns 434
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge 392
    Coping for Walls 264
    Culvert Pipe 431
    Curb and Gutter 319, 321, 323
    Dam Abutments 196
    Dam, Rock Island, Ill. 228
    Five Span Arch Bridge 400
    Gasholder Tank 612
    Girder for Separate Casting 516
    Guard Lock, Ill. & Miss. Canal 200
    Lock, Coosa River 195
    Lock, Ill. & Miss. Canal 201, 203
    Manhole Hartford, Conn. 536
    Marquette Breakwater 211, 212
    Ornamental Columns 446, 447
    Piers for Taintor Gates 198
    Polygonal Columns 443, 444
    Rectangular Columns 435, 443, 490, 492, 511
    Reservoir Bloomington, Ill. 605
    Reservoir, Ft. Meade, S. Dak. 600
    Retaining Wall, C., B. & Q. R. R. 262
    Retaining Wall, Chicago Drainage Canal 275
    Retaining  Wall, Grand Central Terminal 281
    Retaining Walls, N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R. 261, 262
    Salt River Aqueduct 539
    Sewer, Cleveland, O. 564
    Sewer Invert, Haverhill, Mass. 554
    Sewer, Invert, Medford, Mass. 535
    Sewer, Invert, Middlesborough, Ky. 561
    Sewer, South Bend, Ind. 551
    Sewer, Wilmington, Del. 572
    Sidewalks 309
    Six-Story Building 492
    Slab and Girder Floors 450, 456, 492
    Slab and I-Beam Floors 448, 450
    Slab Girders 385
    Steel for Conduits 533
    Steel, McCall Ferry Dam 227, 228
    Steel Sheathed Collapsible for Conduits 533
    Tunnel Centers 335, 341, 352, 358
    Tunnel Sidewalls 330, 335, 340, 351, 358
  Wall 456, 460, 505
    Wall Columns for Factory 498
  Computation, Methods of 140, 141
  Design
    Considerations in 141
    Details Entering 142, 143
  Lubrication, Methods of 144
  Lumber
    Dressing, Purpose of 138
    Finish and Dimensions 138, 139
    Kinds Suitable 138
  Mortar Facing 129
  Pile
    Round 179
  Rectangular Pier
    Cost of, Rule for Calculating 14
  Removing, Time of, Directions for 145, 146
  Unit Construction, Purposes of 143
  Steel, Opportunity for Development 136

Fortification Construction
  Cost of
    Battery Emplacement 188, 189, 190
    Gun Emplacements 185
    Mortar Battery Platform 187
  Methods of
    Battery Emplacement 187, 189
    Gun Emplacements 185
    Mortar Battery Platform 186

Foundation Construction
  Street Railway
    Cost of Continuous Mixer 301
    Methods of Continuous Mixer 300, 301

Freezing Weather, Laying Concrete in 112


G

Grain Elevator Bins
  Construction, Methods of 635

Gravel
  Characteristics of 14
  Commercial Sizes of 22
  Screening and Washing Plants 23
  Screening (See Screening Gravel)
  Voids in
    Amount of 30, 31
    Effect of Granulometric Composition 29, 30
    Weight no Index 32
    Amount of 31, 32

Grouting Under Water
  Hermitage Breakwater 96
  Tests of Efficiency of 95


H

Heating Aggregates
  Efficiency of 114
  Methods of
    Bridge Work, Plano, Ill. 118
    Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R. R. 118
    Hot Water Tanks 120
    Huronian Power Co.'s Dam Work 118
    Portable Combination Heater 115
    Stationary Bin Outfits 115, 116
    Steam Box 119
    Steam Jets 119
    Wachusett Dam Work 117
    Water Power Plant, Billings, Mont. 116, 117

Hoists
  Gallows, Frame and Horse 54
  Ransome 476
  Wallace-Lindesmith 474

Housing Concrete Work
  Methods of
    Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R. R. 119
    Dam, Chaudiere Falls, Quebec 120, 121
    Portable Unit System for Buildings 122, 123


I

Inclines
  Grades of 62


L

Laying Concrete Blocks
  Cost of 526, 529

Loading Concrete
  Characteristic Features 53
  Rate of 53

Loading Materials
  Cost of
    Shoveling into Wheelbarrows 47
    Rate of 6

Lock Construction
  Cost of
    Coosa River 196
    Ill. & Miss. Canal 200, 202, 205, 207
    Cascades Canal 190, 191, 192, 193
    Coosa River 194, 195
    Ill. & Miss. Canal 200, 207
    Lock Foundation 207


M

Manhole Construction
  Cost of
    Rye, N. Y. 577
  Methods of
    Rye, N. Y. 576

Mixers
  Batch
    Chicago 662
    Chicago Improved Cube 75, 661
    Cropp 661
    Forms of 75
    Koehring 662
    Polygon 663
    Ransome 75, 661
    Rate of Output 83, 84
    Smith 77, 662
    Snell 660
  Charging (See Charging Mixers)
  Continuous
    Advanced 660
    Eureka Automatic Feed 78, 660
    Forms of 78
    Foote 297
    Scheiffler 660
  Efficiency of
    Rating, Methods of 84, 85
  Gravity
    Forms of 79
    Gilbreth Trough 80
    Hains, Fixed Hopper 80, 81
    Hains, Telescoping Hopper 81
  Output
    Conditions Affecting 83, 84
      Hains Gravity 83
  Types of 74

Mixing Concrete
  Hand
    Cost of
      Abutment Construction 197
      Culvert Work 428, 430
      Fortification Work 189
      Girder Highway Bridge 380, 382
      Lock, Cascades Canal 192
      Marquette Breakwater,  209, 210, 212
      Retaining Wall, Allegheny  284
      Superintendence, 57, 58
      Cost of, 52, 59
    Methods of Abutment Construction, 196, 197
      Examples from Practice,  49
      Fortification Work, 189
      Lock Foundation, 207
      Marquette Breakwater, 209
      Retaining Wall, Allegheny, 283, 284
      Rates of, 50, 51, 52
      Specific Directions, Necessity, 51, 52
  Machine
    Cost of, 361, 362, 518
      Buffalo Breakwater, 214
      Building Work,  504, 507, 511
      Dam Work, Rock Island, Ill., 225
      Fortification Work, 190
      Hains Gravity Mixer,  83
      Lock, Cascades Canal,  193
      Lock, Ill. & Miss. Canal, 206, 207
      Pier, Superior Entry, Wis., 222
      Retaining Wall, Allegheny, 284
      Retaining Wall Work, 270, 273, 275
    Methods of
      Bridge Abutment Work, 253, 254
      Building Work, 471
      Fortification Work, 189
      Hains Gravity Mixer, 82, 83
      Operations Enumerated,  61
      Piers in Caissons, 165, 166

Mixing Plants
  Construction
    Battery Emplacement,  187, 188
    Bridge Construction, 369, 371, 372, 374, 386, 389, 403.
    Culvert Work, 415, 416, 418, 420, 422, 423
    Dam, McCall Ferry, Pa., 226
    Lock, Cascades Canal,  190, 191
    Lock Work, Coosa River,  194
    Lock Work, Ill. & Miss. Canal, 198, 199, 204
    Pier Work, Superior, Wis.,  221
    Retaining Wall, Grand Central Terminal, 277
    Scow, Port Colborne Harbor, 216, 217
    Traveling, Chaudiere Falls Dam, 228
    Traveling, Chicago Track Elevation, 267
    Traveling, Galveston Sea Wall, 268
  Cost of
    Lock Work, Ill. & Miss. Canal, 199
    Retaining Walls, Chicago Drainage Canal, 274

Mixing Water
  Reducing Freezing Point
    Methods of, 112
    Salt (Sodium Chloride), 113
    Solutions for, Composition of, 113

Molding Blocks
  Cost of, 524, 528, 530, 531
    Marquette Breakwater, 211
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge,  395
    Separate Casting, 519
  Methods of, 523, 526
    Connecticut Ave. Bridge, 393
    Marquette Breakwater, 211
    Pier, Port Colbourne Harbor, 215
    Separate Casting, 513, 515

Molding Cement Pipe
  Cost of
    Irrigon, Ore., 584
    Ransome Mold, 577, 579
  Methods of
    Irrigon, Ore., 581
    Ransome Mold, 577

Molding Culvert Pipe
  Cost of
    Chic. & En. Ill. R. R., 432
  Methods of
    Chic. & En. Ill. R. R., 430

Molding Girders
  Cost of
    Separate Casting, 519
  Methods of
    Separate Casting,   513, 514, 515

Molding Piles
  Forms for (See Forms)
  Methods of
    Corrugated Polygonal, 176
    Round, 179
  Plant Arrangements for, 169
  Cost of, 522

Molding Roof Slabs
  Methods of, 521

Mortar Facing
  Cost of
    Lock, Ill. Miss. Canal, 206
  Forms for, 129


N

Natural Cement (See Cement)


O

Ornament Construction
  Methods of
    Iron Molds, 644
    Molding in Place, 647
    Plaster Molds, 646
    Sand Molding, 644
    Wooden Molds, 637


P

Pavement Base Construction
  Cost of
    Batch Mixer, 306
    Batch Mixer and Wagon Haulage, 302
    Brick, Champaign, Ill., 296
    Continuous Mixers, 298, 300, 305
    Miscellaneous Examples 294, 295, 296
    New Orleans 293
    Stone Block, New York 292
    Toronto, Ont. 293
    Traction Mixer 304
  Methods of
    Batch Mixer 305
    Batch Mixer and Wagon Haulage 302
    Continuous Mixers 297-300, 304
    Hand Mixing 290
    Machine Mixing 290, 291
    Traction Mixer 303
    Mixtures Employed 288
    Organization for 288
    Stock Pile Distribution 289

Pavement Construction
  Cost of
    Fortification Work 186
    Richmond, Ind. 318
    Windsor, Ont. 317
  Methods of
    Richmond, Ind. 318
    Windsor, Ont. 316

Pier Construction
  Cost of
    Lonesome Valley Viaduct 255
    Superior Entry, Wis. 222, 223
    Taintor Gates 198
  Methods of
    Port Colborne Harbor 215-217
    Superior Entry, Wis. 217-223

Piers in Caissons
  Construction of
    Methods of 159-168
  Cost of 168, 169

Pile Construction. (See Molding Piles, Pile Driving.)
  Cost of
    Ocean Pier 173, 174
    Raymond Process 152, 154, 155
  Methods of
    Building Foundation Work 174, 175, 178, 179
    Compressed Process 158, 159
    Enumeration of 151
    Molding in Forms 161-170, 172, 179, 180
    Molding in Place 151
    Ocean Pier 172, 173
    Raymond Process 152
    Rolling Process 181
    Simplex Process 155, 156, 157
    Spread Footing Process 157, 158
    Track Scales 181

Pile Driving
  Conditions Requisite for
  Cost of
    Ocean Pier 173, 174
  Methods of
    Corrugated Polygonal 177, 178
    Hammer 179, 180, 181
    Water Jetting 172, 177

Pile Driving Caps 177, 178, 180

Pile Rolling Machine 182

Piles (See Molding Piles)
  Construction
    Compressol Process 158, 159
    Octagonal 180
    Rolling Process 181
    Round Piles 178, 179
    Spread Footing Process 157, 158
    Square 179, 180
  Cost of
    Rolling Process 183
  Driving (See Pile Driving)
  Handling, Sling for 175
  Raymond
    Construction, Method of 151, 152
    Cost of 152, 154, 155
  Simplex
    Construction, Methods of 155, 156, 157

Placing Concrete
  Cost of
    Bags, Under Water 210
    Belt Conveyors 275
    Buckets Under Water 209
    Buffalo Breakwater 214
    Car and Trestle Plant 196, 201, 202, 206, 207, 244
     280, 422
    Cars and Chute 193
    Cars and Derrick 285
    Derricks 192, 233, 235
    Port Colborne Harbor 217
    Pneumatic Caissons 230
    Retaining Wall Work 270, 272
    Steel Cylinder Pier 241
    Subaqueous Buckets 223
    Wheelbarrows 189, 197, 198, 257, 285, 418, 419, 423
  Methods of
    Building Work 486
    Locks Coosa River 194
    Pneumatic Caissons 237, 238
    Retaining Wall Work 266
    Sewer Work 537

Placing Reinforcement
  Cost of
    Building Work 494
    Directions for 470
    Permanent  Way  Structures 252

Pole Base, Cost of 658

Portland Cement (See Cement)

Proportioning Concrete (See Concrete)


Q

Quarrying
  Cost of
    Limestone 18, 276
    Trap Rock 17
  Methods of
    Limestone 18
    Trap Rock 17


R

Ramming Concrete (See also Placing Concrete)
  Cost of 423
    Conditions Governing 56
    Examples from Practice 56, 57
    Pavement Base 292, 294
  Methods of
    Piers, Lonesome Valley Viaduct 255
    Specific Directions, Necessity of 57

Raymond Piles (See Piles)

Reinforcement
  Weight in Concrete
    Tables for Estimating, 663-665

Removing Forms
  Derrick for, 502
  Methods of
    Building Work, 461
  Time for
    Building Work, 462

Reservoir Construction
  Cost of
    Covered for Fire Protection, 594, 595
    Ft. Meade, S. Dak., 601
  Methods of
    Bloomington, Ill., 603
    Covered for Fire Protection, 588
    Fort Meade, S. Dak., 597

Reservoir Lining
  Cost of
    Canton, Ill., 629
    Chelsea, Mass., 623
    Jerome Park, 628
    Pittsburg, Pa., 630
    Quincy, Mass., 619
  Methods of
    Chelsea, Mass., 620
    Jerome Park, 628
    Quincy, Mass., 617

Reservoir Roof, Cost of 632

Retaining Wall Construction
  Cost of, 286
    Chicago Drainage Canal, 273-277
    Footing for Masonry, 283
    Grand Central Terminal, 280
    Railway Yard, 282
  Methods of
    Allegheny Track Elevation, 283
    Chicago Drainage Canal, 272-277
    Grand Central Terminal, 277-281
    Subway in Trench, 269, 270

Retaining Walls
  Comparison of Plain and Reinforced, 260, 261
  Types of, 259

Rubble Concrete Construction
  Cement, Saving in, 98
  Cost of
    Abutment, Railway Bridge, 106
    Hemet Dam, 104
    Spier Falls Dam, 103
  Economy, Limitations to, 98, 99
  Methods of
    Abutment, Railway Bridge, 105
    Barossa Dam, 101
    Boonton Dam, 103
    Bridge Piers, Nova Scotia, 108
    Bridge Piers, Scotland, 107, 108
    Bridge Piers, Spain, 106, 107
    Chattahoochee River Dam, 100
    Dams for Waterworks, 104, 105
    Hemet Dam, 103, 104
    Spier Falls Dam, 103
  Percentages Rubble Stone, 100, 101, 103, 105, 108
  Shape of Stones for, 99

Runway Construction, Methods of, 48


S

Salt
  Percentages in Mixing Water, 114

Sand
  Balanced, Value of, 6
  Cleanness, Value of, 5
  Cost of
    Excavating and Loading, 6
  Granulometric Composition, 28
  Prices Charged for, 6
  Sharpness, Value of, 5
  Substitutes for, 5
  Voids in
    Amount of, 26, 28
    Conditions Affecting, 25
    Effect of Moisture, 25
    Effect of Size of Grains, 27
  Volume in Concrete, 5
  Weight of, 6, 26

Sand Washing
  Cost of
    Ejector Method, 10
    Hose Method, 7
    Tank Method, 13
  Methods of
    Ejectors, 7
    Hose, 7
    Tank, 10
  Rate of
    Ejector Method, 9
    Hose Method, 7
    Tank Method, 10, 12, 13
  Water Required
    Ejector Method, 9

Sand Washing Plants, 7-13

Screening Gravel
  Cost of
    L. S. & M. S. Ry., 22
    Stewart-Peck Sand Co., 24
  Methods of
    Handwork, 19
    Lock, Cascades Canal, 191
    Scraper into Wagons, 21
    Stewart-Peck Sand Co, 23

Sewer Construction
  Cost of
    Cleveland, O., 566
    Coldwater, Mich., 574
    Haverhill, Mass., 557
    Medford, Mass., 535
    Middlesborough, Ky., 562
    St. Louis, Mo., 560, 561
    South Bend, Ind., 554
    Wilmington, Del., 571, 573
  Methods of
    Cleveland, O., 563
    Coldwater, Mich., 573
    Haverhill, Mass., 554
    Medford, Mass., 535
    Middlesborough, Ky., 561
    Pipe, St. Joseph, Mo., 579
    St. Louis, Mo., 558
    South Bend, Ind., 551
    Wilmington, Del., 569

Shoveling
  Cost of
    Concrete into Barrows, 197
  Rate of
    Broken Stone from Piles, 46
    Broken Stone from Shoveling Boards, 46
    Broken Stone from Cars, 45
    Gravel Against Screens, 21
    Sand into Wheelbarrows, 46

Shoveling Boards Wooden, for Broken Stone, 46

Sidewalk Construction
  Cost of
    Estimation of, 311, 312
    Quincy, Mass., 314
    San Francisco, Cal., 315
    Toronto, Ont., 313
  Methods of
    Bonding Wearing Surface to Base, 310
    Edger for, 310
    General Discussion, 307
    Points for, 310
    Prevention of Cracks, 311
    Protection from Weather,  311
    Quincy, Mass., 314
    Toronto, Ont., 313
    San Francisco, Cal., 314

Silo Construction
  Cost of, 632
  Methods of, 631

Slag,  14

Slag Cement (See Cement)

Specific Gravity, Stone, Various, 32, 33

Spreading Concrete
  Cost of, 197
    Effect of Method of Dumping on,  55

Standpipe Construction
  Cost of
    Attleborough, Mass., 611
  Methods of
    Attleborough, Mass., 609

Stock Piles
  Capacity of,  46
  Distribution, Pavement Work,  289
  Purposes of,  45

Stone
  Specific Gravity, 32, 33

Stone Crushing
  Cost of
    Cobblestone,  20
    Limestone, 18, 225, 273, 276
    Trap Rock,  17
  Methods of
    Cobblestone,  19
    Limestone,  18
    Trap Rock,  17

Stone Crushing Plant
  Construction
    Lock Work. Ill. & Miss. Canal, 200

Stone Dust, Value for Mortar,  5

Storing Materials, Cost of, 185, 225

Subway Lining
  Cost of
    Long Island R. R., 361
    New York Rapid Transit Ry, 357, 358
  Methods of
    Long Island R. R., 361
    New York Rapid Transit Ry., 356

Superintendence
  Cost of, 57, 58, 185, 193, 197, 210, 211, 212, 273, 275, 397


T

Tamping Concrete
  Cost of, 197
    Lock, Ill. & Miss. Canal, 206, 207
  Method of
    Lock, Ill. & Miss. Canal,  204

Tank Construction
  Methods of
    Gas Holder, Des Moines, Ia., 609
    Gas Holder, New York, 614

Tooling Concrete
  Cost of, 394, 396

Transporting Concrete
  Cost of
    Cableways, 270
    Cars, 280
    Chutes,  67
    Cars and Derricks, 285
    Car and Trestle Plant, 63, 210, 212, 222
    Wheelbarrows, 53, 189, 197, 272, 285, 293, 294, 296
  Methods of
    Belt Conveyors (See also Belt Conveyors), 64-65
    Bucket Hoists, 474
    Building Work, 472
    Cableways, 64, 186, 289, 369, 370
    Cars, 404, 421
    Cars and Chute, 191, 192
    Car and Trestle, 63, 243, 246, 377
    Chutes (see also Chutes), 66, 67, 68
    Derricks, 479
    Dump Wagons,  54
    Effect on Placing,  54
    Enumeration of,  52
    Hand Costs,  53
    Hoist and Cars, 372
    Platform Hoists, 479
    Pulley and Horse, 489
    Traveling Derrick Plant, 374
    Trestle Runways,  54
    Wheelbarrows,  53

Transporting Materials
  Cars for, 45
  Cost of
    Bridge Pier Work, 243
    Cars, 275
    Car and Trestle Plant, 222
    Dam, Rock Island, Ill., 225
    Horse Carts, 49, 270, 273
    Lock, Ill. & Miss. Canal, 206, 207
    Wheelbarrows, 47, 48, 189, 197, 214, 280, 292, 293, 294, 296, 419
  Methods of
    Belt Conveyors (see also Belt Conveyors), 64-65
    Cableways, 64, 269
    Carrying in Shovels,  47
    Chutes (see also Chutes), 46, 65, 66
    Hand Carts, 48
    Horse Carts 48
    Indians 62
    Shoveling to Derrick Buckets 46
    Trestle and Car Plants 63
    Wheelbarrows 47

Trestle Runways, Cost of 54, 55

Trestles
  Car, Cost of 63
    Structural Details 63

Tunnel Construction (See Tunnel Lining)

Tunnel Lining
  Backfilling Machine for 330
  Cost of
    Cascade Tunnel 338
    Gunnison Tunnel 355
    Hodges Pass Tunnel 345
    Mullan Tunnel 333
    Peekskill Tunnel 336
    Short Railway 344
  Methods of
    Burton Tunnel 347
    Capitol Hill, Washington, D. C. 329
    Cascade Tunnel 336
    General Discussion 328
    Gunnison Tunnel 353
    Hodges Pass Tunnel 338
    Mullan Tunnel 332
    Peekskill, N. Y. 333
  Mortar Car for 333
  Removing Old, Methods of 332
  Traveling Derrick for 330
  Traveling Platform for 337, 350


U

Unloading Materials
  Cost of
    Grab Buckets 62
  Methods of
    Grab Buckets 62


V

Voids (See also Gravel, Sand, Stone)
  Conditions Governing 25


W

Wall Ties
  Construction of 265

Washing Gravel
  Cost of
    L. S. & M. S. Ry. 22
    Stewart-Peck Sand Co. 24

Washing Gravel
  Methods of
    Lock, Cascades Canal 191
    Stewart-Peck Sand Co. 23

Water
  Quantity in Concrete
    Rule for Figuring 42

Waterproofing
  Cost of
    Hydrolithic Coating 677
    Long Island R. R. Subway 679
    New York Subway 680
    Sylvester Mortar 675
    Sylvester Wash 674
  Methods of
    Bituminous Coatings 670
    Covered Reservoir for Fire Service 596
    Hydrolithic Coating 676
    Impervious Mixtures 668
    Long Island R. R. Subway 678
    Medusa Compound 669
    Moisture Coatings 677
    New York Subway 679
    Novoid Compound 670
    Oil and Paraffin Washes 677
    Star Stellen Cement 669
    Sylvester Mortar 675
    Sylvester Wash 673
    Szerelmey Wash 673

Wheelbarrows
  Loads for 47





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Concrete Construction, by 
Halbert P. Gillette and Charles S. Hill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION ***

***** This file should be named 24855-8.txt or 24855-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/5/24855/

Produced by Brian Sogard, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Commentaries on the Laws of England, by 
William Blackstone

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Commentaries on the Laws of England
       Book the First

Author: William Blackstone

Release Date: December 30, 2009 [EBook #30802]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMMENTARIES--LAWS ENGLAND--BOOK 1 ***




Produced by The Bookworm, Linda Cantoni, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Posner Memorial Collection
(http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/))









[Transcriber's Note: Sir William Blackstone's _Commentaries on the
Laws of England_ was first published in 1765-1769. It contains a
number of archaic spellings (including "goaler" for "gaoler" and
"it's" for "its") that have been preserved as they appear in the
original. All such spellings have been verified using the Oxford
English Dictionary. Inconsistencies in spelling, punctuation,
hyphenation, capitalization, and italicization have also been
preserved. Obvious printer errors have been preserved and marked with
a [Transcriber's Note]. Long s in the original has been modernized as
modern s. The archaic convention of placing quotation marks at the
beginning of each line of a quotation has also been modernized to
quotation marks only at the beginning and end of the quotation.]




COMMENTARIES

ON THE

LAWS

OF

ENGLAND.


BOOK THE FIRST.


BY

WILLIAM BLACKSTONE, ESQ.

VINERIAN PROFESSOR OF LAW,

AND

SOLICITOR GENERAL TO HER MAJESTY.


OXFORD,

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS.

M. DCC. LXV.




TO

THE QUEEN'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY,

THE FOLLOWING VIEW

OF THE LAWS AND CONSTITUTION

OF ENGLAND,

THE IMPROVEMENT AND PROTECTION OF WHICH

HAVE DISTINGUISHED THE REIGN

OF HER MAJESTY'S ROYAL CONSORT,

IS,

WITH ALL GRATITUDE AND HUMILITY,

MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED

BY HER DUTIFUL

AND MOST OBEDIENT

SERVANT,


WILLIAM BLACKSTONE.




PREFACE.


_THE following sheets contain the substance of a course of lectures on
the laws of England, which were read by the author in the university
of OXFORD. His original plan took it's rise in the year 1753: and,
notwithstanding the novelty of such an attempt in this age and
country, and the prejudices usually conceived against any innovations
in the established mode of education, he had the satisfaction to find
(and he acknowleges it with a mixture of pride and gratitude) that his
endeavours were encouraged and patronized by those, both in the
university and out of it, whose good opinion and esteem he was
principally desirous to obtain._

_THE death of Mr VINER in 1756, and his ample benefaction to the
university for promoting the study of the law, produced about two
years afterwards a regular and public establishment of what the author
had privately undertaken. The knowlege of our laws and constitution
was adopted as a liberal science by general academical authority;
competent endowments were decreed for the support of a lecturer, and
the perpetual encouragement of students; and the compiler of the
ensuing commentaries had the honour to be elected the first Vinerian
professor._

_IN this situation he was led, both by duty and inclination, to
investigate the elements of the law, and the grounds of our civil
polity, with greater assiduity and attention than many have thought it
necessary to do. And yet all, who of late years have attended the
public administration of justice, must be sensible that a masterly
acquaintance with the general spirit of laws and the principles of
universal jurisprudence, combined with an accurate knowlege of our own
municipal constitutions, their original, reason, and history, hath
given a beauty and energy to many modern judicial decisions, with
which our ancestors were wholly unacquainted. If, in the pursuit of
these inquiries, the author hath been able to rectify any errors which
either himself or others may have heretofore imbibed, his pains will
be sufficiently answered: and, if in some points he is still mistaken,
the candid and judicious reader will make due allowances for the
difficulties of a search so new, so extensive, and so laborious._

_THE labour indeed of these researches, and of a regular attention to
his duty, for a series of so many years, he hath found inconsistent
with his health, as well as his other avocations: and hath therefore
desired the university's permission to retire from his office, after
the conclusion of the annual course in which he is at present engaged.
But the hints, which he had collected for the use of his pupils,
having been thought by some of his more experienced friends not wholly
unworthy of the public eye, it is therefore with the less reluctance
that he now commits them to the press: though probably the little
degree of reputation, which their author may have acquired by the
candor of an audience (a test widely different from that of a
deliberate perusal) would have been better consulted by a total
suppression of his lectures;----had that been a matter intirely within
his power._

_FOR the truth is, that the present publication is as much the effect
of necessity, as it is of choice. The notes which were taken by his
hearers, have by some of them (too partial in his favour) been thought
worth revising and transcribing; and these transcripts have been
frequently lent to others. Hence copies have been multiplied, in their
nature imperfect, if not erroneous; some of which have fallen into
mercenary hands, and become the object of clandestine sale. Having
therefore so much reason to apprehend a surreptitious impression, he
chose rather to submit his own errors to the world, than to seem
answerable for those of other men. And, with this apology, he commits
himself to the indulgence of the public._




ERRATA.


_Page 138, line 15_: _for_ no _read_ an

_Page 147, (notes) col. 2._ _after_ 1 Sid. 1. _add_ See Stat. 13 Car.
II. c. 7.

_Page 224, line 14_: _after_ sit _add_ at

_Page 376, line 6_: _for_ predial _read_ rectorial




CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.

SECT. I.
_On the_ STUDY _of the_ LAW.                                   Page 3.

SECT. II.
_Of the_ NATURE _of_ LAWS _in general_.                            38.

SECT. III.
_Of the_ LAWS _of_ ENGLAND.                                        63.

SECT. IV.
_Of the_ COUNTRIES _subject to the_ LAWS _of_ ENGLAND.             93.


BOOK I.
_Of the_ RIGHTS _of_ PERSONS.

CHAP. I.
_Of the absolute_ RIGHTS _of_ INDIVIDUALS.                        117.

CHAP. II.
_Of the_ PARLIAMENT.                                              142.

CHAP. III.
_Of the_ KING, _and his_ TITLE.                                   183.

CHAP. IV.
_Of the_ KING'S _royal_ FAMILY.                                   212.

CHAP. V.
_Of the_ COUNCILS _belonging to the_ KING.                        220.

CHAP. VI.
_Of the_ KING'S DUTIES.                                           226.

CHAP. VII.
_Of the_ KING'S PREROGATIVE.                                      230.

CHAP. VIII.
_Of the_ KING'S REVENUE.                                          271.

CHAP. IX.
_Of subordinate_ MAGISTRATES.                                     327.

CHAP. X.
_Of the_ PEOPLE, _whether_ ALIENS, DENIZENS, _or_ NATIVES.        354.

CHAP. XI.
_Of the_ CLERGY.                                                  364.

CHAP. XII.
_Of the_ CIVIL STATE.                                             384.

CHAP. XIII.
_Of the_ MILITARY _and_ MARITIME STATES.                          395.

CHAP. XIV.
_Of_ MASTER _and_ SERVANT.                                        410.

CHAP. XV.
_Of_ HUSBAND _and_ WIFE.                                          421.

CHAP. XVI.
_Of_ PARENT _and_ CHILD.                                          434.

CHAP. XVII.
_Of_ GUARDIAN _and_ WARD.                                         448.

CHAP. XVIII.
_Of_ CORPORATIONS.                                                455.




COMMENTARIES

ON THE

LAWS OF ENGLAND.




INTRODUCTION.

SECTION THE FIRST.

ON THE STUDY OF THE LAW.[A]

[Footnote A: Read in Oxford at the opening of the Vinerian lectures;
25 Oct. 1758.]


MR VICE-CHANCELLOR, AND GENTLEMEN OF THE UNIVERSITY,

THE general expectation of so numerous and respectable an audience,
the novelty, and (I may add) the importance of the duty required from
this chair, must unavoidably be productive of great diffidence and
apprehensions in him who has the honour to be placed in it. He must be
sensible how much will depend upon his conduct in the infancy of a
study, which is now first adopted by public academical authority;
which has generally been reputed (however unjustly) of a dry and
unfruitful nature; and of which the theoretical, elementary parts have
hitherto received a very moderate share of cultivation. He cannot but
reflect that, if either his plan of instruction be crude and
injudicious, or the execution of it lame and superficial, it will cast
a damp upon the farther progress of this most useful and most rational
branch of learning; and may defeat for a time the public-spirited
design of our wise and munificent benefactor. And this he must more
especially dread, when he feels by experience how unequal his
abilities are (unassisted by preceding examples) to complete, in the
manner he could wish, so extensive and arduous a task; since he freely
confesses, that his former more private attempts have fallen very
short of his own ideas of perfection. And yet the candour he has
already experienced, and this last transcendent mark of regard, his
present nomination by the free and unanimous suffrage of a great and
learned university, (an honour to be ever remembered with the deepest
and most affectionate gratitude) these testimonies of your public
judgment must entirely supersede his own, and forbid him to believe
himself totally insufficient for the labour at least of this
employment. One thing he will venture to hope for, and it certainly
shall be his constant aim, by diligence and attention to atone for his
other defects; esteeming, that the best return, which he can possibly
make for your favourable opinion of his capacity, will be his
unwearied endeavours in some little degree to deserve it.

THE science thus committed to his charge, to be cultivated,
methodized, and explained in a course of academical lectures, is that
of the laws and constitution of our own country: a species of
knowlege, in which the gentlemen of England have been more remarkably
deficient than those of all Europe besides. In most of the nations on
the continent, where the civil or imperial law under different
modifications is closely interwoven with the municipal laws of the
land, no gentleman, or at least no scholar, thinks his education is
completed, till he has attended a course or two of lectures, both upon
the institutes of Justinian and the local constitutions of his native
soil, under the very eminent professors that abound in their several
universities. And in the northern parts of our own island, where also
the municipal laws are frequently connected with the civil, it is
difficult to meet with a person of liberal education, who is destitute
of a competent knowlege in that science, which is to be the guardian
of his natural rights and the rule of his civil conduct.

NOR have the imperial laws been totally neglected even in the English
nation. A general acquaintance with their decisions has ever been
deservedly considered as no small accomplishment of a gentleman; and a
fashion has prevailed, especially of late, to transport the growing
hopes of this island to foreign universities, in Switzerland, Germany,
and Holland; which, though infinitely inferior to our own in every
other consideration, have been looked upon as better nurseries of the
civil, or (which is nearly the same) of their own municipal law. In
the mean time it has been the peculiar lot of our admirable system of
laws, to be neglected, and even unknown, by all but one practical
profession; though built upon the soundest foundations, and approved
by the experience of ages.

FAR be it from me to derogate from the study of the civil law,
considered (apart from any binding authority) as a collection of
written reason. No man is more thoroughly persuaded of the general
excellence of it's rules, and the usual equity of it's decisions; nor
is better convinced of it's use as well as ornament to the scholar,
the divine, the statesman, and even the common lawyer. But we must not
carry our veneration so far as to sacrifice our Alfred and Edward to
the manes of Theodosius and Justinian: we must not prefer the edict of
the praetor, or the rescript of the Roman emperor, to our own
immemorial customs, or the sanctions of an English parliament; unless
we can also prefer the despotic monarchy of Rome and Byzantium, for
whose meridians the former were calculated, to the free constitution
of Britain, which the latter are adapted to perpetuate.

WITHOUT detracting therefore from the real merit which abounds in the
imperial law, I hope I may have leave to assert, that if an Englishman
must be ignorant of either the one or the other, he had better be a
stranger to the Roman than the English institutions. For I think it an
undeniable position, that a competent knowlege of the laws of that
society, in which we live, is the proper accomplishment of every
gentleman and scholar; an highly useful, I had almost said essential,
part of liberal and polite education. And in this I am warranted by
the example of antient Rome; where, as Cicero informs us[a], the very
boys were obliged to learn the twelve tables by heart, as a _carmen
necessarium_ or indispensable lesson, to imprint on their tender minds
an early knowlege of the laws and constitutions of their country.

[Footnote a: _De Legg._ 2. 23.]

BUT as the long and universal neglect of this study, with us in
England, seems in some degree to call in question the truth of this
evident position, it shall therefore be the business of this
introductory discourse, in the first place to demonstrate the utility
of some general acquaintance with the municipal law of the land, by
pointing out its particular uses in all considerable situations of
life. Some conjectures will then be offered with regard to the causes
of neglecting this useful study: to which will be subjoined a few
reflexions on the peculiar propriety of reviving it in our own
universities.

AND, first, to demonstrate the utility of some acquaintance with the
laws of the land, let us only reflect a moment on the singular frame
and polity of that land, which is governed by this system of laws. A
land, perhaps the only one in the universe, in which political or
civil liberty is the very end and scope of the constitution[b]. This
liberty, rightly understood, consists in the power of doing whatever
the laws permit[c]; which is only to be effected by a general
conformity of all orders and degrees to those equitable rules of
action, by which the meanest individual is protected from the insults
and oppression of the greatest. As therefore every subject is
interested in the preservation of the laws, it is incumbent upon every
man to be acquainted with those at least, with which he is immediately
concerned; lest he incur the censure, as well as inconvenience, of
living in society without knowing the obligations which it lays him
under. And thus much may suffice for persons of inferior condition,
who have neither time nor capacity to enlarge their views beyond that
contracted sphere in which they are appointed to move. But those, on
whom nature and fortune have bestowed more abilities and greater
leisure, cannot be so easily excused. These advantages are given them,
not for the benefit of themselves only, but also of the public: and
yet they cannot, in any scene of life, discharge properly their duty
either to the public or themselves, without some degree of knowlege in
the laws. To evince this the more clearly, it may not be amiss to
descend to a few particulars.

[Footnote b: Montesq. _Esp. L._ _l._ 11. _c._ 5.]

[Footnote c: _Facultas ejus, quod cuique facere libet, nisi quid vi,
aut jure prohibetur._ _Inst._ 1. 3. 1.]

LET us therefore begin with our gentlemen of independent estates and
fortune, the most useful as well as considerable body of men in the
nation; whom even to suppose ignorant in this branch of learning is
treated by Mr Locke[d] as a strange absurdity. It is their landed
property, with it's long and voluminous train of descents and
conveyances, settlements, entails, and incumbrances, that forms the
most intricate and most extensive object of legal knowlege. The
thorough comprehension of these, in all their minute distinctions, is
perhaps too laborious a task for any but a lawyer by profession: yet
still the understanding of a few leading principles, relating to
estates and conveyancing, may form some check and guard upon a
gentleman's inferior agents, and preserve him at least from very gross
and notorious imposition.

[Footnote d: Education. §. 187.]

AGAIN, the policy of all laws has made some forms necessary in the
wording of last wills and testaments, and more with regard to their
attestation. An ignorance in these must always be of dangerous
consequence, to such as by choice or necessity compile their own
testaments without any technical assistance. Those who have attended
the courts of justice are the best witnesses of the confusion and
distresses that are hereby occasioned in families; and of the
difficulties that arise in discerning the true meaning of the
testator, or sometimes in discovering any meaning at all: so that in
the end his estate may often be vested quite contrary to these his
enigmatical intentions, because perhaps he has omitted one or two
formal words, which are necessary to ascertain the sense with
indisputable legal precision, or has executed his will in the presence
of fewer witnesses than the law requires.

BUT to proceed from private concerns to those of a more public
consideration. All gentlemen of fortune are, in consequence of their
property, liable to be called upon to establish the rights, to
estimate the injuries, to weigh the accusations, and sometimes to
dispose of the lives of their fellow-subjects, by serving upon juries.
In this situation they are frequently to decide, and that upon their
oaths, questions of nice importance, in the solution of which some
legal skill is requisite; especially where the law and the fact, as it
often happens, are intimately blended together. And the general
incapacity, even of our best juries, to do this with any tolerable
propriety has greatly debased their authority; and has unavoidably
thrown more power into the hands of the judges, to direct, control,
and even reverse their verdicts, than perhaps the constitution
intended.

BUT it is not as a juror only that the English gentleman is called
upon to determine questions of right, and distribute justice to his
fellow-subjects: it is principally with this order of men that the
commission of the peace is filled. And here a very ample field is
opened for a gentleman to exert his talents, by maintaining good order
in his neighbourhood; by punishing the dissolute and idle; by
protecting the peaceable and industrious; and, above all, by healing
petty differences and preventing vexatious prosecutions. But, in order
to attain these desirable ends, it is necessary that the magistrate
should understand his business; and have not only the will, but the
power also, (under which must be included the knowlege) of
administring legal and effectual justice. Else, when he has mistaken
his authority, through passion, through ignorance, or absurdity, he
will be the object of contempt from his inferiors, and of censure
from those to whom he is accountable for his conduct.

YET farther; most gentlemen of considerable property, at some period
or other in their lives, are ambitious of representing their country
in parliament: and those, who are ambitious of receiving so high a
trust, would also do well to remember it's nature and importance. They
are not thus honourably distinguished from the rest of their
fellow-subjects, merely that they may privilege their persons, their
estates, or their domestics; that they may list under party banners;
may grant or with-hold supplies; may vote with or vote against a
popular or unpopular administration; but upon considerations far more
interesting and important. They are the guardians of the English
constitution; the makers, repealers, and interpreters of the English
laws; delegated to watch, to check, and to avert every dangerous
innovation, to propose, to adopt, and to cherish any solid and
well-weighed improvement; bound by every tie of nature, of honour, and
of religion, to transmit that constitution and those laws to their
posterity, amended if possible, at least without any derogation. And
how unbecoming must it appear in a member of the legislature to vote
for a new law, who is utterly ignorant of the old! what kind of
interpretation can he be enabled to give, who is a stranger to the
text upon which he comments!

INDEED it is really amazing, that there should be no other state of
life, no other occupation, art, or science, in which some method of
instruction is not looked upon as requisite, except only the science
of legislation, the noblest and most difficult of any. Apprenticeships
are held necessary to almost every art, commercial or mechanical: a
long course of reading and study must form the divine, the physician,
and the practical professor of the laws: but every man of superior
fortune thinks himself _born_ a legislator. Yet Tully was of a
different opinion: "It is necessary, says he[e], for a senator to be
thoroughly acquainted with the constitution; and this, he declares, is
a knowlege of the most extensive nature; a matter of science, of
diligence, of reflexion; without which no senator can possibly be fit
for his office."

[Footnote e: _De Legg._ 3. 18. _Est senatori necessarium nosse
rempublicam; idque late patet:--genus hoc omne scientiae, diligentiae,
memoriae est; sine quo paratus esse senator nullo pacto potest._]

THE mischiefs that have arisen to the public from inconsiderate
alterations in our laws, are too obvious to be called in question; and
how far they have been owing to the defective education of our
senators, is a point well worthy the public attention. The common law
of England has fared like other venerable edifices of antiquity, which
rash and unexperienced workmen have ventured to new-dress and refine,
with all the rage of modern improvement. Hence frequently it's
symmetry has been destroyed, it's proportions distorted, and it's
majestic simplicity exchanged for specious embellishments and
fantastic novelties. For, to say the truth, almost all the perplexed
questions, almost all the niceties, intricacies, and delays (which
have sometimes disgraced the English, as well as other, courts of
justice) owe their original not to the common law itself, but to
innovations that have been made in it by acts of parliament;
"overladen (as sir Edward Coke expresses it[f]) with provisoes and
additions, and many times on a sudden penned or corrected by men of
none or very little judgment in law." This great and well-experienced
judge declares, that in all his time he never knew two questions made
upon rights merely depending upon the common law; and warmly laments
the confusion introduced by ill-judging and unlearned legislators.
"But if, he subjoins, acts of parliament were after the old fashion
penned, by such only as perfectly knew what the common law was before
the making of any act of parliament concerning that matter, as also
how far forth former statutes had provided remedy for former
mischiefs, and defects discovered by experience; then should very few
questions in law arise, and the learned should not so often and so
much perplex their heads to make atonement and peace, by construction
of law, between insensible and disagreeing words, sentences, and
provisoes, as they now do." And if this inconvenience was so heavily
felt in the reign of queen Elizabeth, you may judge how the evil is
increased in later times, when the statute book is swelled to ten
times a larger bulk; unless it should be found, that the penners of
our modern statutes have proportionably better informed themselves in
the knowlege of the common law.

[Footnote f: 2 Rep. Pref.]

WHAT is said of our gentlemen in general, and the propriety of their
application to the study of the laws of their country, will hold
equally strong or still stronger with regard to the nobility of this
realm, except only in the article of serving upon juries. But, instead
of this, they have several peculiar provinces of far greater
consequence and concern; being not only by birth hereditary
counsellors of the crown, and judges upon their honour of the lives of
their brother-peers, but also arbiters of the property of all their
fellow-subjects, and that in the last resort. In this their judicial
capacity they are bound to decide the nicest and most critical points
of the law; to examine and correct such errors as have escaped the
most experienced sages of the profession, the lord keeper and the
judges of the courts at Westminster. Their sentence is final,
decisive, irrevocable: no appeal, no correction, not even a review can
be had: and to their determination, whatever it be, the inferior
courts of justice must conform; otherwise the rule of property would
no longer be uniform and steady.

SHOULD a judge in the most subordinate jurisdiction be deficient in
the knowlege of the law, it would reflect infinite contempt upon
himself and disgrace upon those who employ him. And yet the
consequence of his ignorance is comparatively very trifling and small:
his judgment may be examined, and his errors rectified, by other
courts. But how much more serious and affecting is the case of a
superior judge, if without any skill in the laws he will boldly
venture to decide a question, upon which the welfare and subsistence
of whole families may depend! where the chance of his judging right,
or wrong, is barely equal; and where, if he chances to judge wrong, he
does an injury of the most alarming nature, an injury without
possibility of redress!

YET, vast as this trust is, it can no where be so properly reposed as
in the noble hands where our excellent constitution has placed it: and
therefore placed it, because, from the independence of their fortune
and the dignity of their station, they are presumed to employ that
leisure which is the consequence of both, in attaining a more
extensive knowlege of the laws than persons of inferior rank: and
because the founders of our polity relied upon that delicacy of
sentiment, so peculiar to noble birth; which, as on the one hand it
will prevent either interest or affection from interfering in
questions of right, so on the other it will bind a peer in honour, an
obligation which the law esteems equal to another's oath, to be master
of those points upon which it is his birthright to decide.

THE Roman pandects will furnish us with a piece of history not
unapplicable to our present purpose. Servius Sulpicius, a gentleman of
the patrician order, and a celebrated orator, had occasion to take the
opinion of Quintus Mutius Scaevola, the oracle of the Roman law; but
for want of some knowlege in that science, could not so much as
understand even the technical terms, which his friend was obliged to
make use of. Upon which Mutius Scaevola could not forbear to upbraid
him with this memorable reproof[g], "that it was a shame for a
patrician, a nobleman, and an orator of causes, to be ignorant of that
law in which he was so peculiarly concerned." This reproach made so
deep an impression on Sulpicius, that he immediately applied himself
to the study of the law; wherein he arrived to that proficiency, that
he left behind him about a hundred and fourscore volumes of his own
compiling upon the subject; and became, in the opinion of Cicero[h], a
much more complete lawyer than even Mutius Scaevola himself.

[Footnote g: _Ff._ 1. 2. 2. §. 43. _Turpe esse patricio, & nobili, &
causas oranti, jus in quo versaretur ignorare._]

[Footnote h: _Brut._ 41.]

I WOULD not be thought to recommend to our English nobility and gentry
to become as great lawyers as Sulpicius; though he, together with this
character, sustained likewise that of an excellent orator, a firm
patriot, and a wise indefatigable senator; but the inference which
arises from the story is this, that ignorance of the laws of the land
hath ever been esteemed dishonourable, in those who are entrusted by
their country to maintain, to administer, and to amend them.

BUT surely there is little occasion to enforce this argument any
farther to persons of rank and distinction, if we of this place may be
allowed to form a general judgment from those who are under our
inspection: happy, that while we lay down the rule, we can also
produce the example. You will therefore permit your professor to
indulge both a public and private satisfaction, by bearing this open
testimony; that in the infancy of these studies among us, they were
favoured with the most diligent attendance, and pursued with the most
unwearied application, by those of the noblest birth and most ample
patrimony: some of whom are still the ornaments of this seat of
learning; and others at a greater distance continue doing honour to
it's institutions, by comparing our polity and laws with those of
other kingdoms abroad, or exerting their senatorial abilities in the
councils of the nation at home.

NOR will some degree of legal knowlege be found in the least
superfluous to persons of inferior rank; especially those of the
learned professions. The clergy in particular, besides the common
obligations they are under in proportion to their rank and fortune,
have also abundant reason, considered merely as clergymen, to be
acquainted with many branches of the law, which are almost peculiar
and appropriated to themselves alone. Such are the laws relating to
advowsons, institutions, and inductions; to simony, and simoniacal
contracts; to uniformity, residence, and pluralities; to tithes and
other ecclesiastical dues; to marriages (more especially of late) and
to a variety of other subjects, which are consigned to the care of
their order by the provisions of particular statutes. To understand
these aright, to discern what is warranted or enjoined, and what is
forbidden by law, demands a sort of legal apprehension; which is no
otherwise to be acquired than by use and a familiar acquaintance with
legal writers.

FOR the gentlemen of the faculty of physic, I must frankly own that I
see no special reason, why they in particular should apply themselves
to the study of the law; unless in common with other gentlemen, and to
complete the character of general and extensive knowlege; a character
which their profession, beyond others, has remarkably deserved. They
will give me leave however to suggest, and that not ludicrously, that
it might frequently be of use to families upon sudden emergencies, if
the physician were acquainted with the doctrine of last wills and
testaments, at least so far as relates to the formal part of their
execution.

BUT those gentlemen who intend to profess the civil and ecclesiastical
laws in the spiritual and maritime courts of this kingdom, are of all
men (next to common lawyers) the most indispensably obliged to apply
themselves seriously to the study of our municipal laws. For the civil
and canon laws, considered with respect to any intrinsic obligation,
have no force or authority in this kingdom; they are no more binding
in England than our laws are binding at Rome. But as far as these
foreign laws, on account of some peculiar propriety, have in some
particular cases, and in some particular courts, been introduced and
allowed by our laws, so far they oblige, and no farther; their
authority being wholly founded upon that permission and adoption. In
which we are not singular in our notions; for even in Holland, where
the imperial law is much cultivated and it's decisions pretty
generally followed, we are informed by Van Leeuwen[i], that, "it
receives it's force from custom and the consent of the people, either
tacitly or expressly given: for otherwise, he adds, we should no more
be bound by this law, than by that of the Almains, the Franks, the
Saxons, the Goths, the Vandals, and other of the antient nations."
Wherefore, in all points in which the different systems depart from
each other, the law of the land takes place of the law of Rome,
whether antient or modern, imperial or pontificial. And in those of
our English courts wherein a reception has been allowed to the civil
and canon laws, if either they exceed the bounds of that reception, by
extending themselves to other matters, than are permitted to them; or
if such courts proceed according to the decisions of those laws, in
cases wherein it is controlled by the law of the land, the common law
in either instance both may, and frequently does, prohibit and annul
their proceedings[k]: and it will not be a sufficient excuse for them
to tell the king's courts at Westminster, that their practice is
warranted by the laws of Justinian or Gregory, or is conformable to
the decrees of the Rota or imperial chamber. For which reason it
becomes highly necessary for every civilian and canonist that would
act with safety as a judge, or with prudence and reputation as an
advocate, to know in what cases and how far the English laws have
given sanction to the Roman; in what points the latter are rejected;
and where they are both so intermixed and blended together, as to form
certain supplemental parts of the common law of England, distinguished
by the titles of the king's maritime, the king's military, and the
king's ecclesiastical law. The propriety of which enquiry the
university of Oxford has for more than a century so thoroughly seen,
that in her statutes[l] she appoints, that one of the three questions
to be annually discussed at the act by the jurist-inceptors shall
relate to the common law; subjoining this reason, "_quia juris civilis
studiosos decet haud imperitos esse juris municipalis, & differentias
exteri patriique juris notas habere_." And the statutes[m] of the
university of Cambridge speak expressly to the same effect.

[Footnote i: _Dedicatio corporis juris civilis._ _Edit._ 1663.]

[Footnote k: Hale. Hist. C.L. c. 2. Selden _in Fletam_. 5 Rep.
Caudrey's Case. 2 Inst. 599.]

[Footnote l: _Tit. VII. Sect._ 2. §. 2.]

[Footnote m: _Doctor legum mox a doctoratu dabit operam legibus
Angliae, ut non sit imperitus earum legum quas habet sua patria, et
differentias exteri patriique juris noscat._ _Stat._ Eliz. _R._ _c._
14. Cowel. _Institut. in proëmio._]

FROM the general use and necessity of some acquaintance with the
common law, the inference were extremely easy, with regard to the
propriety of the present institution, in a place to which gentlemen of
all ranks and degrees resort, as the fountain of all useful knowlege.
But how it has come to pass that a design of this sort has never
before taken place in the university, and the reason why the study of
our laws has in general fallen into disuse, I shall previously proceed
to enquire.

SIR John Fortescue, in his panegyric on the laws of England, (which
was written in the reign of Henry the sixth) puts[n] a very obvious
question in the mouth of the young prince, whom he is exhorting to
apply himself to that branch of learning; "why the laws of England,
being so good, so fruitful, and so commodious, are not taught in the
universities, as the civil and canon laws are?" In answer to which he
gives[o] what seems, with due deference be it spoken, a very jejune
and unsatisfactory reason; being in short, that "as the proceedings at
common law were in his time carried on in three different tongues, the
English, the Latin, and the French, that science must be necessarily
taught in those three several languages; but that in the universities
all sciences were taught in the Latin tongue only; and therefore he
concludes, that they could not be conveniently taught or studied in
our universities." But without attempting to examine seriously the
validity of this reason, (the very shadow of which by the wisdom of
your late constitutions is entirely taken away) we perhaps may find
out a better, or at least a more plausible account, why the study of
the municipal laws has been banished from these seats of science, than
what the learned chancellor thought it prudent to give to his royal
pupil.

[Footnote n: _c._ 47.]

[Footnote o: _c._ 48.]

THAT antient collection of unwritten maxims and customs, which is
called the common law, however compounded or from whatever fountains
derived, had subsisted immemorially in this kingdom; and, though
somewhat altered and impaired by the violence of the times, had in
great measure weathered the rude shock of the Norman conquest. This
had endeared it to the people in general, as well because it's
decisions were universally known, as because it was found to be
excellently adapted to the genius of the English nation. In the
knowlege of this law consisted great part of the learning of those
dark ages; it was then taught, says Mr Selden[p], in the monasteries,
_in the universities_, and in the families of the principal nobility.
The clergy in particular, as they then engrossed almost every other
branch of learning, so (like their predecessors the British druids[q])
they were peculiarly remarkable for their proficiency in the study of
the law. _Nullus clericus nisi causidicus_, is the character given of
them soon after the conquest by William of Malmsbury[r]. The judges
therefore were usually created out of the sacred order[s], as was
likewise the case among the Normans[t]; and all the inferior offices
were supplied by the lower clergy, which has occasioned their
successors to be denominated _clerks_ to this day.

[Footnote p: _in Fletam._ 7. 7.]

[Footnote q: Caesar _de bello Gal._ 6. 12.]

[Footnote r: _de gest. reg._ _l._ 4.]

[Footnote s: Dugdale _Orig. jurid._ _c._ 8.]

[Footnote t: _Les juges sont sages personnes & autentiques,--sicome
les archevesques, evesques, les chanoines les eglises cathedraulx, &
les autres personnes qui ont dignitez in saincte eglise; les abbez,
les prieurs conventaulx, & les gouverneurs des eglises, &c._ _Grand
Coustumier_, _ch._ 9.]

BUT the common law of England, being not committed to writing, but
only handed down by tradition, use, and experience, was not so
heartily relished by the foreign clergy; who came over hither in
shoals during the reign of the conqueror and his two sons, and were
utter strangers to our constitution as well as our language. And an
accident, which soon after happened, had nearly completed it's ruin. A
copy of Justinian's pandects, being newly[u] discovered at Amalfi,
soon brought the civil law into vogue all over the west of Europe,
where before it was quite laid aside[w] and in a manner forgotten;
though some traces of it's authority remained in Italy[x] and the
eastern provinces of the empire[y]. This now became in a particular
manner the favourite of the popish clergy, who borrowed the method and
many of the maxims of their canon law from this original. The study of
it was introduced into several universities abroad, particularly that
of Bologna; where exercises were performed, lectures read, and degrees
conferred in this faculty, as in other branches of science: and many
nations on the continent, just then beginning to recover from the
convulsions consequent upon the overthrow of the Roman empire, and
settling by degrees into peaceable forms of government, adopted the
civil law, (being the best written system then extant) as the basis of
their several constitutions; blending and interweaving it among their
own feodal customs, in some places with a more extensive, in others a
more confined authority[z].

[Footnote u: _circ. A.D._ 1130.]

[Footnote w: _LL. Wisigoth._ 2. 1. 9.]

[Footnote x: _Capitular. Hludov. Pii._ 4. 102.]

[Footnote y: Selden _in Fletam._ 5. 5.]

[Footnote z: Domat's treatise of laws. c. 13. §. 9. _Epistol.
Innocent. IV. in M. Paris. ad A.D._ 1254.]

NOR was it long before the prevailing mode of the times reached
England. For Theobald, a Norman abbot, being elected to the see of
Canterbury[a], and extremely addicted to this new study, brought over
with him in his retinue many learned proficients therein; and among
the rest Roger sirnamed Vacarius, whom he placed in the university of
Oxford[b], to teach it to the people of this country. But it did not
meet with the same easy reception in England, where a mild and
rational system of laws had been long established, as it did upon the
continent; and, though the monkish clergy (devoted to the will of a
foreign primate) received it with eagerness and zeal, yet the laity
who were more interested to preserve the old constitution, and had
already severely felt the effect of many Norman innovations, continued
wedded to the use of the common law. King Stephen immediately
published a proclamation[c], forbidding the study of the laws, then
newly imported from Italy; which was treated by the monks[d] as a
piece of impiety, and, though it might prevent the introduction of the
civil law process into our courts of justice, yet did not hinder the
clergy from reading and teaching it in their own schools and
monasteries.

[Footnote a: _A.D._ 1138.]

[Footnote b: Gervas. Dorobern. _Act. Pontif. Cantuar. col._ 1665.]

[Footnote c: Rog. Bacon. _citat. per_ Selden. _in Fletam._ 7. 6. _in
Fortesc._ _c._ 33. & 8 Rep. Pref.]

[Footnote d: Joan. Sarisburiens. _Polycrat._ 8. 22.]

FROM this time the nation seems to have been divided into two parties;
the bishops and clergy, many of them foreigners, who applied
themselves wholly to the study of the civil and canon laws, which now
came to be inseparably interwoven with each other; and the nobility
and laity, who adhered with equal pertinacity to the old common law;
both of them reciprocally jealous of what they were unacquainted with,
and neither of them perhaps allowing the opposite system that real
merit which is abundantly to be found in each. This appears on the one
hand from the spleen with which the monastic writers[e] speak of our
municipal laws upon all occasions; and, on the other, from the firm
temper which the nobility shewed at the famous parliament of Merton;
when the prelates endeavoured to procure an act, to declare all
bastards legitimate in case the parents intermarried at any time
afterwards; alleging this only reason, because holy church (that is,
the canon law) declared such children legitimate: but "all the earls
and barons (says the parliament roll[f]) with one voice answered, that
they would not change the laws of England, which had hitherto been
used and approved." And we find the same jealousy prevailing above a
century afterwards[g], when the nobility declared with a kind of
prophetic spirit, "that the realm of England hath never been unto this
hour, neither by the consent of our lord the king and the lords of
parliament shall it ever be, ruled or governed by the civil law[h]."
And of this temper between the clergy and laity many more instances
might be given.

[Footnote e: _Idem, ibid._ 5. 16. Polydor. Vergil. _Hist._ _l._ 9.]

[Footnote f: _Stat. Merton._ 20 _Hen. III._ _c._ 9. _Et omnes comites
& barones una voce responderunt, quod nolunt leges Angliae mutare,
quae hucusque usitatae sunt & approbatae._]

[Footnote g: 11 Ric. II.]

[Footnote h: Selden. _Jan. Anglor._ _l._ 2. §. 43. _in Fortesc._ _c._
33.]

WHILE things were in this situation, the clergy, finding it impossible
to root out the municipal law, began to withdraw themselves by degrees
from the temporal courts; and to that end, very early in the reign of
king Henry the third, episcopal constitutions were published[i],
forbidding all ecclesiastics to appear as advocates _in foro
saeculari_; nor did they long continue to act as judges there, nor
caring to take the oath of office which was then found necessary to be
administred, that they should in all things determine according to the
law and custom of this realm[k]; though they still kept possession of
the high office of chancellor, an office then of little juridical
power; and afterwards, as it's business increased by degrees, they
modelled the process of the court at their own discretion.

[Footnote i: Spelman. _Concil. A.D._ 1217. Wilkins, _vol._ 1. _p._
574, 599.]

[Footnote k: Selden. _in Fletam._ 9. 3.]

BUT wherever they retired, and wherever their authority extended, they
carried with them the same zeal to introduce the rules of the civil,
in exclusion of the municipal law. This appears in a particular manner
from the spiritual courts of all denominations, from the chancellor's
courts in both our universities, and from the high court of chancery
before-mentioned; in all of which the proceedings are to this day in a
course much conformed to the civil law: for which no tolerable reason
can be assigned, unless that these courts were all under the immediate
direction of the popish ecclesiastics, among whom it was a point of
religion to exclude the municipal law; pope Innocent the fourth
having[l] forbidden the very reading of it by the clergy, because it's
decisions were not founded on the imperial constitutions, but merely
on the customs of the laity. And if it be considered, that our
universities began about that period to receive their present form of
scholastic discipline; that they were then, and continued to be till
the time of the reformation, entirely under the influence of the
popish clergy; (sir John Mason the first protestant, being also the
first lay, chancellor of Oxford) this will lead us to perceive the
reason, why the study of the Roman laws was in those days of
bigotry[m] pursued with such alacrity in these seats of learning; and
why the common law was entirely despised, and esteemed little better
than heretical.

[Footnote l: M. Paris _ad A.D._ 1254.]

[Footnote m: There cannot be a stronger instance of the absurd and
superstitious veneration that was paid to these laws, than that the
most learned writers of the times thought they could not form a
perfect character, even of the blessed virgin, without making her a
civilian and a canonist. Which Albertus Magnus, the renowned dominican
doctor of the thirteenth century, thus proves in his _Summa de
laudibus christiferae virginis (divinum magis quam humanum opus)_
_qu._ 23. §. 5. "_Item quod jura civilia, & leges, & decreta scivit in
summo, probatur hoc modo: sapientia advocati manifestatur in tribus;
unum, quod obtineat omnia contra judicem justum & sapientem; secundo,
quod contra adversarium astutum & sagacem; tertio, quod in causa
desperata: sed beatissima virgo, contra judicem sapientissimum,
Dominum; contra adversarium callidissimum, dyabolum; in causa nostra
desperata; sententiam optatam obtinuit._" To which an eminent
franciscan, two centuries afterwards, Bernardinus de Busti (_Mariale_,
_part._ 4. _serm._ 9.) very gravely subjoins this note. "_Nec videtur
incongruum mulieres habere peritiam juris. Legitur enim de uxore
Joannis Andreae glossatoris, quod tantam peritiam in utroque jure
habuit, ut publice in scholis legere ausa sit._"]

AND, since the reformation, many causes have conspired to prevent it's
becoming a part of academical education. As, first, long usage and
established custom; which, as in every thing else, so especially in
the forms of scholastic exercise, have justly great weight and
authority. Secondly, the real intrinsic merit of the civil law,
considered upon the footing of reason and not of obligation, which was
well known to the instructors of our youth; and their total ignorance
of the merit of the common law, though it's equal at least, and
perhaps an improvement on the other. But the principal reason of all,
that has hindered the introduction of this branch of learning, is,
that the study of the common law, being banished from hence in the
times of popery, has fallen into a quite different chanel, and has
hitherto been wholly cultivated in another place. But as this long
usage and established custom, of ignorance in the laws of the land,
begin now to be thought unreasonable; and as by this means the merit
of those laws will probably be more generally known; we may hope that
the method of studying them will soon revert to it's antient course,
and the foundations at least of that science will be laid in the two
universities; without being exclusively confined to the chanel which
it fell into at the times I have been just describing.

FOR, being then entirely abandoned by the clergy, a few stragglers
excepted, the study and practice of it devolved of course into the
hands of laymen; who entertained upon their parts a most hearty
aversion to the civil law[n], and made no scruple to profess their
contempt, nay even their ignorance[o] of it, in the most public
manner. But still, as the ballance of learning was greatly on the side
of the clergy, and as the common law was no longer _taught_, as
formerly, in any part of the kingdom, it must have been subjected to
many inconveniences, and perhaps would have been gradually lost and
overrun by the civil, (a suspicion well justified from the frequent
transcripts of Justinian to be met with in Bracton and Fleta) had it
not been for a peculiar incident, which happened at a very critical
time, and contributed greatly to it's support.

[Footnote n: Fortesc. _de laud. LL._ _c._ 25.]

[Footnote o: This remarkably appeared in the case of the abbot of
Torun, _M._ 22 _E._ 3. 24. who had caused a certain prior to be
summoned to answer at Avignon for erecting an oratory _contra
inhibitionem novi operis_; by which words Mr Selden, (_in Flet._ 8.
5.) very justly understands to be meant the title _de novi operis
nuntiatione_ both in the civil and canon laws, (_Ff._ 39. 1. _C._ 8.
11. and _Decretal._ not _Extrav._ 5. 32.) whereby the erection of any
new buildings in prejudice of more antient ones was prohibited. But
Skipwith the king's serjeant, and afterwards chief baron of the
exchequer, declares them to be flat nonsense; "_in ceux parolx_,
contra inhibitionem novi operis, _ny ad pas entendment_:" and justice
Schardelow mends the matter but little by informing him, that they
signify a restitution _in their law_; for which reason he very sagely
resolves to pay no sort of regard to them. "_Ceo n'est que un
restitution en lour ley, pur que a ceo n'avomus regard, &c._"]

THE incident I mean was the fixing the court of common pleas, the
grand tribunal for disputes of property, to be held in one certain
spot; that the seat of ordinary justice might be permanent and
notorious to all the nation. Formerly that, in conjunction with all
the other superior courts, was held before the king's capital
justiciary of England, in the _aula regis_, or such of his palaces
wherein his royal person resided; and removed with his houshold from
one end of the kingdom to the other. This was found to occasion great
inconvenience to the suitors; to remedy which it was made an article
of the great charter of liberties, both that of king John and king
Henry the third[p], that "common pleas should no longer follow the
king's court, but be held in some certain place:" in consequence of
which they have ever since been held (a few necessary removals in
times of the plague excepted) in the palace of Westminster only. This
brought together the professors of the municipal law, who before were
dispersed about the kingdom, and formed them into an aggregate body;
whereby a society was established of persons, who (as Spelman[q]
observes) addicting themselves wholly to the study of the laws of the
land, and no longer considering it as a mere subordinate science for
the amusement of leisure hours, soon raised those laws to that pitch
of perfection, which they suddenly attained under the auspices of our
English Justinian, king Edward the first.

[Footnote p: _c._ 11.]

[Footnote q: _Glossar._ 334.]

IN consequence of this lucky assemblage, they naturally fell into a
kind of collegiate order, and, being excluded from Oxford and
Cambridge, found it necessary to establish a new university of their
own. This they did by purchasing at various times certain houses (now
called the inns of court and of chancery) between the city of
Westminster, the place of holding the king's courts, and the city of
London; for advantage of ready access to the one, and plenty of
provisions in the other[r]. Here exercises were performed, lectures
read, and degrees were at length conferred in the common law, as at
other universities in the canon and civil. The degrees were those of
barristers (first stiled apprentices[s] from _apprendre_, to learn)
who answered to our bachelors; as the state and degree of a
serjeant[t], _servientis ad legem_, did to that of doctor.

[Footnote r: Fortesc. _c._ 48.]

[Footnote s: Apprentices or Barristers seem to have been first
appointed by an ordinance of king Edward the first in parliament, in
the 20th year of his reign. (Spelm. _Gloss._ 37. Dugdale. _Orig.
jurid._ 55.)]

[Footnote t: The first mention I have met with in our lawbooks of
serjeants or countors, is in the statute of Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 29.
and in Horn's Mirror, _c._ 1. §. 10. _c._ 2. §. 5. _c._ 3. §. 1. in
the same reign. But M. Paris in his life of John II, abbot of St.
Alban's, which he wrote in 1255, 39 Hen. III. speaks of advocates at
the common law, or countors (_quos banci narratores vulgariter
appellamus_) as of an order of men well known. And we have an example
of the antiquity of the coif in the same author's history of England,
_A.D._ 1259. in the case of one William de Bussy; who, being called to
account for his great knavery and malpractices, claimed the benefit of
his orders or clergy, which till then remained an entire secret; and
to that end _voluit ligamenta coifae suae solvere, ut palam monstraret
se tonsuram habere clericalem; sed non est permissus.----Satelles vero
eum arripiens, non per coifae ligamina sed per guttur eum
apprehendens, traxit ad carcerem_. And hence sir H. Spelman
conjectures, (_Glossar._ 335.) that coifs were introduced to hide the
tonsure of such renegade clerks, as were still tempted to remain in
the secular courts in the quality of advocates or judges,
notwithstanding their prohibition by canon.]

THE crown seems to have soon taken under it's protection this infant
seminary of common law; and, the more effectually to foster and
cherish it, king Henry the third in the nineteenth year of his reign
issued out an order directed to the mayor and sheriffs of London,
commanding that no regent of any law schools _within_ that city should
for the future teach law therein[u]. The word, law, or _leges_, being
a general term, may create some doubt at this distance of time whether
the teaching of the civil law, or the common, or both, is hereby
restrained. But in either case it tends to the same end. If the civil
law only is prohibited, (which is Mr Selden's[w] opinion) it is then a
retaliation upon the clergy, who had excluded the common law from
_their_ seats of learning. If the municipal law be also included in
the restriction, (as sir Edward Coke[x] understands it, and which the
words seem to import) then the intention is evidently this; by
preventing private teachers within the walls of the city, to collect
all the common lawyers into the one public university, which was newly
instituted in the suburbs.

[Footnote u: _Ne aliquis scholas regens de legibus in eadem civitate
de caetero ibidem leges doceat._]

[Footnote w: _in Flet._ 8. 2.]

[Footnote x: 2 Inst. proëm.]

IN this juridical university (for such it is insisted to have been by
Fortescue[y] and sir Edward Coke[z]) there are two sorts of collegiate
houses; one called inns of chancery, in which the younger students of
the law were usually placed, "learning and studying, says
Fortescue[a], the originals and as it were the elements of the law;
who, profiting therein, as they grow to ripeness so are they admitted
into the greater inns of the same study, called the inns of court."
And in these inns of both kinds, he goes on to tell us, the knights
and barons, with other grandees and noblemen of the realm, did use to
place their children, though they did not desire to have them
thoroughly learned in the law, or to get their living by it's
practice: and that in his time there were about two thousand students
at these several inns, all of whom he informs us were _filii
nobilium_, or gentlemen born.

[Footnote y: _c._ 49.]

[Footnote z: 3 Rep. pref.]

[Footnote a: _ibid._]

HENCE it is evident, that (though under the influence of the monks our
universities neglected this study, yet) in the time of Henry the sixth
it was thought highly necessary and was the universal practice, for
the young nobility and gentry to be instructed in the originals and
elements of the laws. But by degres [Transcriber's Note: degrees] this
custom has fallen into disuse; so that in the reign of queen Elizabeth
sir Edward Coke[b] does not reckon above a thousand students, and the
number at present is very considerably less. Which seems principally
owing to these reasons: first, because the inns of chancery being now
almost totally filled by the inferior branch of the profession, they
are neither commodious nor proper for the resort of gentlemen of any
rank or figure; so that there are now very rarely any young students
entered at the inns of chancery: secondly, because in the inns of
court all sorts of regimen and academical superintendance, either with
regard to morals or studies, are found impracticable and therefore
entirely neglected: lastly, because persons of birth and fortune,
after having finished their usual courses at the universities, have
seldom leisure or resolution sufficient to enter upon a new scheme of
study at a new place of instruction. Wherefore few gentlemen now
resort to the inns of court, but such for whom the knowlege of
practice is absolutely necessary; such, I mean, as are intended for
the profession: the rest of our gentry, (not to say our nobility also)
having usually retired to their estates, or visited foreign kingdoms,
or entered upon public life, without any instruction in the laws of
the land; and indeed with hardly any opportunity of gaining
instruction, unless it can be afforded them in these seats of
learning.

[Footnote b: _ibid._]

AND that these are the proper places, for affording assistances of
this kind to gentlemen of all stations and degrees, cannot (I think)
with any colour of reason be denied. For not one of the objections,
which are made to the inns of court and chancery, and which I have
just enumerated, will hold with regard to the universities. Gentlemen
may here associate with gentlemen of their own rank and degree. Nor
are their conduct and studies left entirely to their own discretion;
but regulated by a discipline so wise and exact, yet so liberal, so
sensible and manly, that their conformity to it's rules (which does at
present so much honour to our youth) is not more the effect of
constraint, than of their own inclinations and choice. Neither need
they apprehend too long an avocation hereby from their private
concerns and amusements, or (what is a more noble object) the service
of their friends and their country. This study will go hand in hand
with their other pursuits: it will obstruct none of them; it will
ornament and assist them all.

BUT if, upon the whole, there are any still wedded to monastic
prejudice, that can entertain a doubt how far this study is properly
and regularly _academical_, such persons I am afraid either have not
considered the constitution and design of an university, or else think
very meanly of it. It must be a deplorable narrowness of mind, that
would confine these seats of instruction to the limited views of one
or two learned professions. To the praise of this age be it spoken, a
more open and generous way of thinking begins now universally to
prevail. The attainment of liberal and genteel accomplishments, though
not of the intellectual sort, has been thought by our wisest and most
affectionate patrons[c], and very lately by the whole university[d],
no small improvement of our antient plan of education; and therefore I
may safely affirm that nothing (how _unusual_ soever) is, under due
regulations, improper to be _taught_ in this place, which is proper
for a gentleman to _learn_. But that a science, which distinguishes
the criterions of right and wrong; which teaches to establish the one,
and prevent, punish, or redress the other; which employs in it's
theory the noblest faculties of the soul, and exerts in it's practice
the cardinal virtues of the heart; a science, which is universal in
it's use and extent, accommodated to each individual, yet
comprehending the whole community; that a science like this should
have ever been deemed unnecessary to be studied in an university, is
matter of astonishment and concern. Surely, if it were not before an
object of academical knowlege, it was high time to make it one; and to
those who can doubt the propriety of it's reception among us (if any
such there be) we may return an answer in their own way; that ethics
are confessedly a branch of academical learning, and Aristotle
_himself has said_, speaking of the laws of his own country, that
jurisprudence or the knowlege of those laws is the principal and
most[e] perfect branch of ethics.

[Footnote c: Lord chancellor Clarendon, in his dialogue of education,
among his tracts, p. 325. appears to have been very solicitous, that
it might be made "a part of the ornament of our learned academies to
teach the qualities of riding, dancing, and fencing, at those hours
when more serious exercises should be intermitted."]

[Footnote d: By accepting in full convocation the remainder of lord
Clarendon's history from his noble descendants, on condition to apply
the profits arising from it's publication to the establishment of a
_manage_ in the university.]

[Footnote e: [Greek: Teleia malista aretê, hoti tês teleias aretês
chrêsis esti.] _Ethic. ad Nicomach._ _l._ 5. _c._ 3.]

FROM a thorough conviction of this truth, our munificent benefactor Mr
VINER, having employed above half a century in amassing materials for
new modelling and rendering more commodious the rude study of the laws
of the land, consigned both the plan and execution of these his
public-spirited designs to the wisdom of his parent university.
Resolving to dedicate his learned labours "to the benefit of posterity
and the perpetual service of his country[f]," he was sensible he could
not perform his resolutions in a better and more effectual manner,
than by extending to the youth of this place those assistances, of
which he so well remembered and so heartily regretted the want. And
the sense, which the university has entertained of this ample and most
useful benefaction, must appear beyond a doubt from their gratitude in
receiving it with all possible marks of esteem[g]; from their alacrity
and unexampled dispatch in carrying it into execution[h]; and, above
all, from the laws and constitutions by which they have effectually
guarded it from the neglect and abuse to which such institutions are
liable[i]. We have seen an universal emulation, who best should
understand, or most faithfully pursue, the designs of our generous
patron: and with pleasure we recollect, that those who are most
distinguished by their quality, their fortune, their station, their
learning, or their experience, have appeared the most zealous to
promote the success of Mr Viner's establishment.

[Footnote f: See the preface to the eighteenth volume of his
abridgment.]

[Footnote g: Mr Viner is enrolled among the public benefactors of the
university by decree of convocation.]

[Footnote h: Mr Viner died June 5, 1756. His effects were collected
and settled, near a volume of his work printed, almost the whole
disposed of, and the accounts made up, in a year and a half from his
decease, by the very diligent and worthy administrators with the will
annexed, (Dr West and Dr Good of Magdalene, Dr Whalley of Oriel, Mr
Buckler of All Souls, and Mr Betts of University college) to whom that
care was consigned by the university. Another half year was employed
in considering and settling a plan of the proposed institution, and in
framing the statutes thereupon, which were finally confirmed by
convocation on the 3d of July, 1758. The professor was elected on
the 20th of October following, and two scholars on the succeeding
day. And, lastly, it was agreed at the annual audit in 1761, to
establish a fellowship; and a fellow was accordingly elected in
January following.--The residue of this fund, arising from the sale of
Mr Viner's abridgment, will probably be sufficient hereafter to found
another fellowship and scholarship, or three more scholarships, as
shall be thought most expedient.]

[Footnote i: The statutes are in substance as follows:

1. THAT the accounts of this benefaction be separately kept, and
annually audited by the delegates of accounts and professor, and
afterwards reported to convocation.

2. THAT a professorship of the laws of England be established, with a
salary of two hundred pounds _per annum_; the professor to be elected
by convocation, and to be at the time of his election at least a
master of arts or bachelor of civil law in the university of Oxford,
of ten years standing from his matriculation; and also a barrister at
law of four years standing at the bar.

3. THAT such professor (by himself, or by deputy to be previously
approved by convocation) do read one solemn public lecture on the laws
of England, and in the English language, in every academical term, at
certain stated times previous to the commencement of the common law
term; or forfeit twenty pounds for every omission to Mr Viner's
general fund: and also (by himself, or by deputy to be approved, if
occasional, by the vice-chancellor and proctors; or, if permanent,
both the cause and the deputy to be annually approved by convocation)
do yearly read one complete course of lectures on the laws of England,
and in the English language, consisting of sixty lectures at the
least, to be read during the university term time, with such proper
intervals that not more than four lectures may fall within any single
week: that the professor do give a month's notice of the time when the
course is to begin, and do read _gratis_ to the scholars of Mr Viner's
foundation; but may demand of other auditors such gratuity as shall be
settled from time to time by decree of convocation: and that, for
every of the said sixty lectures omitted, the professor, on complaint
made to the vice-chancellor within the year, do forfeit forty
shillings to Mr Viner's general fund; the proof of having performed
his duty to lie upon the said professor.

4. THAT every professor do continue in his office during life, unless
in case of such misbehaviour as shall amount to bannition by the
university statutes; or unless he deserts the profession of the law by
betaking himself to another profession; or unless, after one
admonition by the vice-chancellor and proctors for notorious neglect,
he is guilty of another flagrant omission: in any of which cases he be
deprived by the vice-chancellor, with consent of the house of
convocation.

5. THAT such a number of fellowships with a stipend of fifty pounds
_per annum_, and scholarships with a stipend of thirty pounds be
established, as the convocation shall from time to time ordain,
according to the state of Mr Viner's revenues.

6. THAT every fellow be elected by convocation, and at the time of
election be unmarried, and at least a master of arts or bachelor of
civil law, and a member of some college or hall in the university of
Oxford; the scholars of this foundation or such as have been scholars
(if qualified and approved of by convocation) to have the preference:
that, if not a barrister when chosen, he be called to the bar within
one year after his election; but do reside in the university two
months in every year, or in case of non-residence do forfeit the
stipend of that year to Mr Viner's general fund.

7. THAT every scholar be elected by convocation, and at the time of
election be unmarried, and a member of some college or hall in the
university of Oxford, who shall have been matriculated twenty four
calendar months at the least: that he do take the degree of bachelor
of civil law with all convenient speed; (either proceeding in arts or
otherwise) and previous to his taking the same, between the second and
eighth year from his matriculation, be bound to attend two courses of
the professor's lectures, to be certified under the professor's hand;
and within one year after taking the same be called to the bar: that
he do annually reside six months till he is of four years standing,
and four months from that time till he is master of arts or bachelor
of civil law; after which he be bound to reside two months in every
year; or, in case of non-residence, do forfeit the stipend of that
year to Mr Viner's general fund.

8. THAT the scholarships do become void in case of non-attendance on
the professor, or not taking the degree of bachelor of civil law,
being duly admonished so to do by the vice-chancellor and proctors:
and that both fellowships and scholarships do expire at the end of ten
years after each respective election; and become void in case of gross
misbehaviour, non-residence for two years together, marriage, not
being called to the bar within the time before limited, (being duly
admonished so to be by the vice-chancellor and proctors) or deserting
the profession of the law by following any other profession: and that
in any of these cases the vice-chancellor, with consent of
convocation, do declare the place actually void.

9. THAT in case of any vacancy of the professorship, fellowships, or
scholarships, the profits of the current year be ratably divided
between the predecessor or his representatives, and the successor; and
that a new election be had within one month afterwards, unless by that
means the time of election shall fall within any vacation, in which
case it be deferred to the first week in the next full term. And that
before any convocation shall be held for such election, or for any
other matter relating to Mr Viner's benefaction, ten days public
notice be given to each college and hall of the convocation, and the
cause of convoking it.]

THE advantages that might result to the science of the law itself,
when a little more attended to in these seats of knowlege, perhaps
would be very considerable. The leisure and abilities of the learned
in these retirements might either suggest expedients, or execute those
dictated by wiser heads[k], for improving it's method, retrenching
it's superfluities, and reconciling the little contrarieties, which
the practice of many centuries will necessarily create in any human
system: a task, which those who are deeply employed in business, and
the more active scenes of the profession, can hardly condescend to
engage in. And as to the interest, or (which is the same) the
reputation of the universities themselves, I may venture to pronounce,
that if ever this study should arrive to any tolerable perfection
either here or at Cambridge, the nobility and gentry of this kingdom
would not shorten their residence upon this account, nor perhaps
entertain a worse opinion of the benefits of academical education.
Neither should it be considered as a matter of light importance, that
while we thus extend the _pomoeria_ of university learning, and adopt
a new tribe of citizens within these philosophical walls, we interest
a very numerous and very powerful profession in the preservation of
our rights and revenues.

[Footnote k: See lord Bacon's proposals and offer of a digest.]

FOR I think it is past dispute that those gentlemen, who resort to the
inns of court with a view to pursue the profession, will find it
expedient (whenever it is practicable) to lay the previous foundations
of this, as well as every other science, in one of our learned
universities. We may appeal to the experience of every sensible
lawyer, whether any thing can be more hazardous or discouraging than
the usual entrance on the study of the law. A raw and unexperienced
youth, in the most dangerous season of life, is transpanted
[Transcriber's Note: transplanted] on a sudden into the midst of
allurements to pleasure, without any restraint or check but what his
own prudence can suggest; with no public direction in what course to
pursue his enquiries; no private assistance to remove the distresses
and difficulties, which will always embarass a beginner. In this
situation he is expected to sequester himself from the world, and by a
tedious lonely process to extract the theory of law from a mass of
undigested learning; or else by an assiduous attendance on the courts
to pick up theory and practice together, sufficient to qualify him for
the ordinary run of business. How little therefore is it to be
wondered at, that we hear of so frequent miscarriages; that so many
gentlemen of bright imaginations grow weary of so unpromising a
search[l], and addict themselves wholly to amusements, or other less
innocent pursuits; and that so many persons of moderate capacity
confuse themselves at first setting out, and continue ever dark and
puzzled during the remainder of their lives!

[Footnote l: Sir Henry Spelman, in the preface to his glossary, gives
us a very lively picture of his own distress upon this occasion.
"_Emisit me mater Londinum, juris nostri capessendi gratia; cujus cum
vestibulum salutassem, reperissemque linguam peregrinam, dialectum
barbaram, methodum inconcinnam, molem non ingentem solum sed perpetuis
humeris sustinendam, excidit mihi (fateor) animus, &c._"]

THE evident want of some assistance in the rudiments of legal
knowlege, has given birth to a practice, which, if ever it had grown
to be general, must have proved of extremely pernicious consequence:
I mean the custom, by some so very warmly recommended, to drop all
liberal education, as of no use to lawyers; and to place them, in it's
stead, as [Transcriber's Note: at] the desk of some skilful attorney;
in order to initiate them early in all the depths of practice, and
render them more dextrous in the mechanical part of business. A few
instances of particular persons, (men of excellent learning, and
unblemished integrity) who, in spight of this method of education,
have shone in the foremost ranks of the bar, have afforded some kind
of sanction to this illiberal path to the profession, and biassed many
parents, of shortsighted judgment, in it's favour: not considering,
that there are some geniuses, formed to overcome all disadvantages,
and that from such particular instances no general rules can be
formed; nor observing, that those very persons have frequently
recommended by the most forcible of all examples, the disposal of
their own offspring, a very different foundation of legal studies, a
regular academical education. Perhaps too, in return, I could now
direct their eyes to our principal seats of justice, and suggest a few
hints, in favour of university learning[m]:--but in these all who hear
me, I know, have already prevented me.

[Footnote m: The four highest offices in the law were at that time
filled by gentlemen, two of whom had been fellows of All Souls
college; another, student of Christ-Church; and the fourth a fellow of
Trinity college, Cambridge.]

MAKING therefore due allowance for one or two shining exceptions,
experience may teach us to foretell that a lawyer thus educated to the
bar, in subservience to attorneys and solicitors[n], will find he has
begun at the wrong end. If practice be the whole he is taught,
practice must also be the whole he will ever know: if he be
uninstructed in the elements and first principles upon which the rule
of practice is founded, the least variation from established
precedents will totally distract and bewilder him: _ita lex scripta
est_[o] is the utmost his knowlege will arrive at; he must never
aspire to form, and seldom expect to comprehend, any arguments drawn
_a priori_, from the spirit of the laws and the natural foundations of
justice.

[Footnote n: See Kennet's life of Somner. p. 67.]

[Footnote o: _Ff._ 40. 9. 12.]

NOR is this all; for (as few persons of birth, or fortune, or even of
scholastic education, will submit to the drudgery of servitude and the
manual labour of copying the trash of an office) should this
infatuation prevail to any considerable degree, we must rarely expect
to see a gentleman of distinction or learning at the bar. And what the
consequence may be, to have the interpretation and enforcement of the
laws (which include the entire disposal of our properties, liberties,
and lives) fall wholly into the hands of obscure or illiterate men, is
matter of very public concern.

THE inconveniences here pointed out can never be effectually
prevented, but by making academical education a previous step to the
profession of the common law, and at the same time making the
rudiments of the law a part of academical education. For sciences are
of a sociable disposition, and flourish best in the neighbourhood of
each other: nor is there any branch of learning, but may be helped and
improved by assistances drawn from other arts. If therefore the
student in our laws hath formed both his sentiments and style, by
perusal and imitation of the purest classical writers, among whom the
historians and orators will best deserve his regard; if he can reason
with precision, and separate argument from fallacy, by the clear
simple rules of pure unsophisticated logic; if he can fix his
attention, and steadily pursue truth through any the most intricate
deduction, by the use of mathematical demonstrations; if he has
enlarged his conceptions of nature and art, by a view of the several
branches of genuine, experimental, philosophy; if he has impressed on
his mind the sound maxims of the law of nature, the best and most
authentic foundation of human laws; if, lastly, he has contemplated
those maxims reduced to a practical system in the laws of imperial
Rome; if he has done this or any part of it, (though all may be easily
done under as able instructors as ever graced any seats of learning) a
student thus qualified may enter upon the study of the law with
incredible advantage and reputation. And if, at the conclusion, or
during the acquisition of these accomplishments, he will afford
himself here a year or two's farther leisure, to lay the foundation of
his future labours in a solid scientifical method, without thirsting
too early to attend that practice which it is impossible he should
rightly comprehend, he will afterwards proceed with the greatest ease,
and will unfold the most intricate points with an intuitive rapidity
and clearness.

I SHALL not insist upon such motives as might be drawn from principles
of oeconomy, and are applicable to particulars only: I reason upon
more general topics. And therefore to the qualities of the head, which
I have just enumerated, I cannot but add those of the heart;
affectionate loyalty to the king, a zeal for liberty and the
constitution, a sense of real honour, and well grounded principles of
religion; as necessary to form a truly valuable English lawyer, a
Hyde, a Hale, or a Talbot. And, whatever the ignorance of some, or
unkindness of others, may have heretofore untruly suggested,
experience will warrant us to affirm, that these endowments of loyalty
and public spirit, of honour and religion, are no where to be found in
more high perfection than in the two universities of this kingdom.

BEFORE I conclude, it may perhaps be expected, that I lay before you a
short and general account of the method I propose to follow, in
endeavouring to execute the trust you have been pleased to repose in
my hands. And in these solemn lectures, which are ordained to be read
at the entrance of every term, (more perhaps to do public honour to
this laudable institution, than for the private instruction of
individuals[p]) I presume it will best answer the intent of our
benefactor and the expectation of this learned body, if I attempt to
illustrate at times such detached titles of the law, as are the most
easy to be understood, and most capable of historical or critical
ornament. But in reading the complete course, which is annually
consigned to my care, a more regular method will be necessary; and,
till a better is proposed, I shall take the liberty to follow the
same that I have already submitted to the public[q]. To fill up and
finish that outline with propriety and correctness, and to render the
whole intelligible to the uninformed minds of beginners, (whom we are
too apt to suppose acquainted with terms and ideas, which they never
had opportunity to learn) this must be my ardent endeavour, though by
no means my promise to accomplish. You will permit me however very
briefly to describe, rather what I conceive an academical expounder of
the laws should do, than what I have ever known to be done.

[Footnote p: See Lowth's _Oratio Crewiana_, p. 365.]

[Footnote q: The Analysis of the laws of England, first published,
_A.D._ 1756, and exhibiting the order and principal divisions of the
ensuing COMMENTARIES; which were originally submitted to the
university in a private course of lectures, _A.D._ 1753.]

HE should consider his course as a general map of the law, marking out
the shape of the country, it's connexions and boundaries, it's greater
divisions and principal cities: it is not his business to describe
minutely the subordinate limits, or to fix the longitude and latitude
of every inconsiderable hamlet. His attention should be engaged, like
that of the readers in Fortescue's inns of chancery, "in tracing out
the originals and as it were the elements of the law." For if, as
Justinian[r] has observed, the tender understanding of the student be
loaded at the first with a multitude and variety of matter, it will
either occasion him to desert his studies, or will carry him heavily
through them, with much labour, delay, and despondence. These
originals should be traced to their fountains, as well as our distance
will permit; to the customs of the Britons and Germans, as recorded by
Caesar and Tacitus; to the codes of the northern nations on the
continent, and more especially to those of our own Saxon princes; to
the rules of the Roman law, either left here in the days of Papinian,
or imported by Vacarius and his followers; but, above all, to that
inexhaustible reservoir of legal antiquities and learning, the feodal
law, or, as Spelman[s] has entitled it, the law of nations in our
western orb. These primary rules and fundamental principles should be
weighed and compared with the precepts of the law of nature, and the
practice of other countries; should be explained by reasons,
illustrated by examples, and confirmed by undoubted authorities; their
history should be deduced, their changes and revolutions observed, and
it should be shewn how far they are connected with, or have at any
time been affected by, the civil transactions of the kingdom.

[Footnote r: _Incipientibus nobis exponere jura populi Romani, ita
videntur tradi posse commodissime, si primo levi ac simplici via
singula tradantur: Alioqui, si statim ab initio rudem adhuc & infirmum
animum studiosi multitudine ac varietate rerum oneravimus, duorum
alterum, aut desertorem studiorum efficiemus, aut cum magno labore,
saepe etiam cum diffidentia (quae plerumque juvenes avertit) serius ad
id perducemus, ad quod leviore via ductus, sine magno labore & sine
ulla diffidentia maturius perduci potuisset._ _Inst._ 1. 1. 2.]

[Footnote s: Of Parliaments. 57.]

A PLAN of this nature, if executed with care and ability, cannot fail
of administring a most useful and rational entertainment to students
of all ranks and professions; and yet it must be confessed that the
study of the laws is not merely a matter of amusement: for as a very
judicious writer[t] has observed upon a similar occasion, the learner
"will be considerably disappointed if he looks for entertainment
without the expence of attention." An attention, however, not greater
than is usually bestowed in mastering the rudiments of other sciences,
or sometimes in pursuing a favorite recreation or exercise. And this
attention is not equally necessary to be exerted by every student upon
every occasion. Some branches of the law, as the formal process of
civil suits, and the subtile distinctions incident to landed property,
which are the most difficult to be thoroughly understood, are the
least worth the pains of understanding, except to such gentlemen as
intend to pursue the profession. To others I may venture to apply,
with a slight alteration, the words of sir John Fortescue[u], when
first his royal pupil determines to engage in this study. "It will not
be necessary for a gentleman, as such, to examine with a close
application the critical niceties of the law. It will fully be
sufficient, and he may well enough be denominated a lawyer, if under
the instruction of a master he traces up the principles and grounds of
the law, even to their original elements. Therefore in a very short
period, and with very little labour, he may be sufficiently informed
in the laws of his country, if he will but apply his mind in good
earnest to receive and apprehend them. For, though such knowlege as is
necessary for a judge is hardly to be acquired by the lucubrations of
twenty years, yet with a genius of tolerable perspicacity, that
knowlege which is fit for a person of birth or condition may be
learned in a single year, without neglecting his other improvements."

[Footnote t: Dr Taylor's preface to Elem. of civil law.]

[Footnote u: _Tibi, princeps, necesse non erit mysteria legis Angliae
longo disciplinatu rimare. Sufficiet tibi,--_et fatis _denominari
legista mereberis, si legum principia & causas, usque ad elementa,
discipuli more indagaveris.--Quare tu, princeps serenissime, parvo
tempore, parva industria, sufficienter eris in legibus regni Angliae
eruditus, dummodo ad ejus apprehensionem tu conferas animum
tuum.--Nosco namque ingenii tui perspicacitatem, quo audacter
pronuntio quod in legibus illis (licet earum peritia, qualis judicibus
necessaria est, vix viginti annorum lucubrationibus acquiratur) tu
doctrinam principi congruam in anno uno sufficienter nancisceris; nec
interim militarem disciplinam, ad quam tam ardenter anhelas, negliges;
sed ea, recreationis loco, etiam anno illo tu ad libitum perfrueris._
_c._ 8.]

TO the few therefore (the very few, I am persuaded,) that entertain
such unworthy notions of an university, as to suppose it intended for
mere dissipation of thought; to such as mean only to while away the
aukward interval from childhood to twenty one, between the restraints
of the school and the licentiousness of politer life, in a calm middle
state of mental and of moral inactivity; to these Mr Viner gives no
invitation to an entertainment which they never can relish. But to the
long and illustrious train of noble and ingenuous youth, who are not
more distinguished among us by their birth and possessions, than by
the regularity of their conduct and their thirst after useful
knowlege, to these our benefactor has consecrated the fruits of a long
and laborious life, worn out in the duties of his calling; and will
joyfully reflect (if such reflexions can be now the employment of his
thoughts) that he could not more effectually have benefited posterity,
or contributed to the service of the public, than by founding an
institution which may instruct the rising generation in the wisdom of
our civil polity, and inform them with a desire to be still better
acquainted with the laws and constitution of their country.




SECTION THE SECOND.

OF THE NATURE OF LAWS IN GENERAL.


LAW, in it's most general and comprehensive sense, signifies a rule of
action; and is applied indiscriminately to all kinds of action,
whether animate, or inanimate, rational or irrational. Thus we say,
the laws of motion, of gravitation, of optics, or mechanics, as well
as the laws of nature and of nations. And it is that rule of action,
which is prescribed by some superior, and which the inferior is bound
to obey.

THUS when the supreme being formed the universe, and created matter
out of nothing, he impressed certain principles upon that matter, from
which it can never depart, and without which it would cease to be.
When he put that matter into motion, he established certain laws of
motion, to which all moveable bodies must conform. And, to descend
from the greatest operations to the smallest, when a workman forms a
clock, or other piece of mechanism, he establishes at his own pleasure
certain arbitrary laws for it's direction; as that the hand shall
describe a given space in a given time; to which law as long as the
work conforms, so long it continues in perfection, and answers the end
of it's formation.

IF we farther advance, from mere inactive matter to vegetable and
animal life, we shall find them still governed by laws; more numerous
indeed, but equally fixed and invariable. The whole progres of plants,
from the seed to the root, and from thence to the seed again;--the
method of animal nutrition, digestion, secretion, and all other
branches of vital oeconomy;--are not left to chance, or the will of
the creature itself, but are performed in a wondrous involuntary
manner, and guided by unerring rules laid down by the great creator.

THIS then is the general signification of law, a rule of action
dictated by some superior being; and in those creatures that have
neither the power to think, nor to will, such laws must be invariably
obeyed, so long as the creature itself subsists, for it's existence
depends on that obedience. But laws, in their more confined sense, and
in which it is our present business to consider them, denote the
rules, not of action in general, but of _human_ action or conduct:
that is, the precepts by which man, the noblest of all sublunary
beings, a creature endowed with both reason and freewill, is commanded
to make use of those faculties in the general regulation of his
behaviour.

MAN, considered as a creature, must necessarily be subject to the laws
of his creator, for he is entirely a dependent being. A being,
independent of any other, has no rule to pursue, but such as he
prescribes to himself; but a state of dependance will inevitably
oblige the inferior to take the will of him, on whom he depends, as
the rule of his conduct: not indeed in every particular, but in all
those points wherein his dependance consists. This principle therefore
has more or less extent and effect, in proportion as the superiority
of the one and the dependance of the other is greater or less,
absolute or limited. And consequently as man depends absolutely upon
his maker for every thing, it is necessary that he should in all
points conform to his maker's will.

THIS will of his maker is called the law of nature. For as God, when
he created matter, and endued it with a principle of mobility,
established certain rules for the perpetual direction of that motion;
so, when he created man, and endued him with freewill to conduct
himself in all parts of life, he laid down certain immutable laws of
human nature, whereby that freewill is in some degree regulated and
restrained, and gave him also the faculty of reason to discover the
purport of those laws.

CONSIDERING the creator only as a being of infinite _power_, he was
able unquestionably to have prescribed whatever laws he pleased to his
creature, man, however unjust or severe. But as he is also a being of
infinite _wisdom_, he has laid down only such laws as were founded in
those relations of justice, that existed in the nature of things
antecedent to any positive precept. These are the eternal, immutable
laws of good and evil, to which the creator himself in all his
dispensations conforms; and which he has enabled human reason to
discover, so far as they are necessary for the conduct of human
actions. Such among others are these principles: that we should live
honestly, should hurt nobody, and should render to every one it's due;
to which three general precepts Justinian[a] has reduced the whole
doctrine of law.

[Footnote a: _Juris praecepta sunt haec, honeste vivere, alterum non
laedere, suum cuique tribuere._ _Inst._ 1. 1. 3.]

BUT if the discovery of these first principles of the law of nature
depended only upon the due exertion of right reason, and could not
otherwise be attained than by a chain of metaphysical disquisitions,
mankind would have wanted some inducement to have quickened their
inquiries, and the greater part of the world would have rested content
in mental indolence, and ignorance it's inseparable companion. As
therefore the creator is a being, not only of infinite _power_, and
_wisdom_, but also of infinite _goodness_, he has been pleased so to
contrive the constitution and frame of humanity, that we should want
no other prompter to enquire after and pursue the rule of right, but
only our own self-love, that universal principle of action. For he has
so intimately connected, so inseparably interwoven the laws of eternal
justice with the happiness of each individual, that the latter cannot
be attained but by observing the former; and, if the former be
punctually obeyed, it cannot but induce the latter. In consequence of
which mutual connection of justice and human felicity, he has not
perplexed the law of nature with a multitude of abstracted rules and
precepts, referring merely to the fitness or unfitness of things, as
some have vainly surmised; but has graciously reduced the rule of
obedience to this one paternal precept, "that man should pursue his
own happiness." This is the foundation of what we call ethics, or
natural law. For the several articles into which it is branched in our
systems, amount to no more than demonstrating, that this or that
action tends to man's real happiness, and therefore very justly
concluding that the performance of it is a part of the law of nature;
or, on the other hand, that this or that action is destructive of
man's real happiness, and therefore that the law of nature forbids it.

THIS law of nature, being co-eval with mankind and dictated by God
himself, is of course superior in obligation to any other. It is
binding over all the globe, in all countries, and at all times: no
human laws are of any validity, if contrary to this; and such of them
as are valid derive all their force, and all their authority,
mediately or immediately, from this original.

BUT in order to apply this to the particular exigencies of each
individual, it is still necessary to have recourse to reason; whose
office it is to discover, as was before observed, what the law of
nature directs in every circumstance of life; by considering, what
method will tend the most effectually to our own substantial
happiness. And if our reason were always, as in our first ancestor
before his transgression, clear and perfect, unruffled by passions,
unclouded by prejudice, unimpaired by disease or intemperance, the
task would be pleasant and easy; we should need no other guide but
this. But every man now finds the contrary in his own experience; that
his reason is corrupt, and his understanding full of ignorance and
error.

THIS has given manifold occasion for the benign interposition of
divine providence; which, in companion to the frailty, the
imperfection, and the blindness of human reason, hath been pleased,
at sundry times and in divers manners, to discover and enforce it's
laws by an immediate and direct revelation. The doctrines thus
delivered we call the revealed or divine law, and they are to be found
only in the holy scriptures. These precepts, when revealed, are found
upon comparison to be really a part of the original law of nature, as
they tend in all their consequences to man's felicity. But we are not
from thence to conclude that the knowlege of these truths was
attainable by reason, in it's present corrupted state; since we find
that, until they were revealed, they were hid from the wisdom of ages.
As then the moral precepts of this law are indeed of the same original
with those of the law of nature, so their intrinsic obligation is of
equal strength and perpetuity. Yet undoubtedly the revealed law is
(humanly speaking) of infinitely more authority than what we generally
call the natural law. Because one is the law of nature, expressly
declared so to be by God himself; the other is only what, by the
assistance of human reason, we imagine to be that law. If we could be
as certain of the latter as we are of the former, both would have an
equal authority; but, till then, they can never be put in any
competition together.

UPON these two foundations, the law of nature and the law of
revelation, depend all human laws; that is to say, no human laws
should be suffered to contradict these. There is, it is true, a great
number of indifferent points, in which both the divine law and the
natural leave a man at his own liberty; but which are found necessary
for the benefit of society to be restrained within certain limits. And
herein it is that human laws have their greatest force and efficacy;
for, with regard to such points as are not indifferent, human laws are
only declaratory of, and act in subordination to, the former. To
instance in the case of murder: this is expressly forbidden by the
divine, and demonstrably by the natural law; and from these
prohibitions arises the true unlawfulness of this crime. Those human
laws, that annex a punishment to it, do not at all increase it's moral
guilt, or superadd any fresh obligation _in foro conscientiae_ to
abstain from it's perpetration. Nay, if any human law should allow or
injoin us to commit it, we are bound to transgress that human law, or
else we must offend both the natural and the divine. But with regard
to matters that are in themselves indifferent, and are not commanded
or forbidden by those superior laws; such, for instance, as exporting
of wool into foreign countries; here the inferior legislature has
scope and opportunity to interpose, and to make that action unlawful
which before was not so.

IF man were to live in a state of nature, unconnected with other
individuals, there would be no occasion for any other laws, than the
law of nature, and the law of God. Neither could any other law
possibly exist; for a law always supposes some superior who is to make
it; and in a state of nature we are all equal, without any other
superior but him who is the author of our being. But man was formed
for society; and, as is demonstrated by the writers on this
subject[b], is neither capable of living alone, nor indeed has the
courage to do it. However, as it is impossible for the whole race of
mankind to be united in one great society, they must necessarily
divide into many; and form separate states, commonwealths, and
nations; entirely independent of each other, and yet liable to a
mutual intercourse. Hence arises a third kind of law to regulate this
mutual intercourse, called "the law of nations;" which, as none of
these states will acknowlege a superiority in the other, cannot be
dictated by either; but depends entirely upon the rules of natural
law, or upon mutual compacts, treaties, leagues, and agreements
between these several communities: in the construction also of which
compacts we have no other rule to resort to, but the law of nature;
being the only one to which both communities are equally subject: and
therefore the civil law[c] very justly observes, that _quod naturalis
ratio inter omnes homines constituit, vocatur jus gentium_.

[Footnote b: Puffendorf, _l._ 7. _c._ 1. compared with Barbeyrac's
commentary.]

[Footnote c: _Ff._ 1. 1. 9.]

THUS much I thought it necessary to premise concerning the law of
nature, the revealed law, and the law of nations, before I proceeded
to treat more fully of the principal subject of this section,
municipal or civil law; that is, the rule by which particular
districts, communities, or nations are governed; being thus defined by
Justinian[d], "_jus civile est quod quisque sibi populus constituit_."
I call it _municipal_ law, in compliance with common speech; for, tho'
strictly that expression denotes the particular customs of one single
_municipium_ or free town, yet it may with sufficient propriety be
applied to any one state or nation, which is governed by the same laws
and customs.

[Footnote d: _Inst._ 1. 2. 1.]

MUNICIPAL law, thus understood, is properly defined to be "a rule of
civil conduct prescribed by the supreme power in a state, commanding
what is right and prohibiting what is wrong." Let us endeavour to
explain it's several properties, as they arise out of this definition.

AND, first, it is a _rule_; not a transient sudden order from a
superior to or concerning a particular person; but something
permanent, uniform, and universal. Therefore a particular act of the
legislature to confiscate the goods of Titius, or to attaint him of
high treason, does not enter into the idea of a municipal law: for the
operation of this act is spent upon Titius only, and has no relation
to the community in general; it is rather a sentence than a law. But
an act to declare that the crime of which Titius is accused shall be
deemed high treason; this has permanency, uniformity, and
universality, and therefore is properly a _rule_. It is also called a
_rule_, to distinguish it from _advice_ or _counsel_, which we are at
liberty to follow or not, as we see proper; and to judge upon the
reasonableness or unreasonableness of the thing advised. Whereas our
obedience to the _law_ depends not upon _our approbation_, but upon
the _maker's will_. Counsel is only matter of persuasion, law is
matter of injunction; counsel acts only upon the willing, law upon the
unwilling also.

IT is also called a _rule_, to distinguish it from a _compact_ or
_agreement_; for a compact is a promise proceeding _from_ us, law is a
command directed _to_ us. The language of a compact is, "I will, or
will not, do this;" that of a law is, "thou shalt, or shalt not, do
it." It is true there is an obligation which a compact carries with
it, equal in point of conscience to that of a law; but then the
original of the obligation is different. In compacts, we ourselves
determine and promise what shall be done, before we are obliged to do
it; in laws, we are obliged to act, without ourselves determining or
promising any thing at all. Upon these accounts law is defined to be
"_a rule_."

MUNICIPAL law is also "a rule _of civil conduct_." This distinguishes
municipal law from the natural, or revealed; the former of which is
the rule of _moral_ conduct, and the latter not only the rule of moral
conduct, but also the rule of faith. These regard man as a creature,
and point out his duty to God, to himself, and to his neighbour,
considered in the light of an individual. But municipal or civil law
regards him also as a citizen, and bound to other duties towards his
neighbour, than those of mere nature and religion: duties, which he
has engaged in by enjoying the benefits of the common union; and which
amount to no more, than that he do contribute, on his part, to the
subsistence and peace of the society.

IT is likewise "a rule _prescribed_." Because a bare resolution,
confined in the breast of the legislator, without manifesting itself
by some external sign, can never be properly a law. It is requisite
that this resolution be notified to the people who are to obey it. But
the manner in which this notification is to be made, is matter of very
great indifference. It may be notified by universal tradition and long
practice, which supposes a previous publication, and is the case of
the common law of England. It may be notified, _viva voce_, by
officers appointed for that purpose, as is done with regard to
proclamations, and such acts of parliament as are appointed to be
publicly read in churches and other assemblies. It may lastly be
notified by writing, printing, or the like; which is the general
course taken with all our acts of parliament. Yet, whatever way is
made use of, it is incumbent on the promulgators to do it in the most
public and perspicuous manner; not like Caligula, who (according to
Dio Cassius) wrote his laws in a very small character, and hung them
up upon high pillars, the more effectually to ensnare the people.
There is still a more unreasonable method than this, which is called
making of laws _ex post facto_; when _after_ an action is committed,
the legislator then for the first time declares it to have been a
crime, and inflicts a punishment upon the person who has committed it;
here it is impossible that the party could foresee that an action,
innocent when it was done, should be afterwards converted to guilt by
a subsequent law; he had therefore no cause to abstain from it; and
all punishment for not abstaining must of consequence be cruel and
unjust[e]. All laws should be therefore made to commence _in futuro_,
and be notified before their commencement; which is implied in the
term "_prescribed_." But when this rule is in the usual manner
notified, or prescribed, it is then the subject's business to be
thoroughly acquainted therewith; for if ignorance, of what he _might_
know, were admitted as a legitimate excuse, the laws would be of no
effect, but might always be eluded with impunity.

[Footnote e: Such laws among the Romans were denominated _privilegia_,
or private laws, of which Cicero _de leg._ 3. 19. and in his oration
_pro domo_, 17. thus speaks; "_Vetant leges sacratae, vetant duodecim
tabulae, leges privatis hominibus irrogari; id enim est privilegium.
Nemo unquam tulit, nihil est crudelius, nihil perniciosius, nihil quod
minus haec civitas ferre possit_."]

BUT farther: municipal law is "a rule of civil conduct prescribed _by
the supreme power in a state_." For legislature, as was before
observed, is the greatest act of superiority that can be exercised by
one being over another. Wherefore it is requisite to the very essence
of a law, that it be made by the supreme power. Sovereignty and
legislature are indeed convertible terms; one cannot subsist without
the other.

THIS will naturally lead us into a short enquiry concerning the nature
of society and civil government; and the natural, inherent right that
belongs to the sovereignty of a state, wherever that sovereignty be
lodged, of making and enforcing laws.

THE only true and natural foundations of society are the wants and the
fears of individuals. Not that we can believe, with some theoretical
writers, that there ever was a time when there was no such thing as
society; and that, from the impulse of reason, and through a sense of
their wants and weaknesses, individuals met together in a large plain,
entered into an original contract, and chose the tallest man present
to be their governor. This notion, of an actually existing unconnected
state of nature, is too wild to be seriously admitted; and besides it
is plainly contradictory to the revealed accounts of the primitive
origin of mankind, and their preservation two thousand years
afterwards; both which were effected by the means of single families.
These formed the first society, among themselves; which every day
extended it's limits, and when it grew too large to subsist with
convenience in that pastoral state, wherein the patriarchs appear to
have lived, it necessarily subdivided itself by various migrations
into more. Afterwards, as agriculture increased, which employs and can
maintain a much greater number of hands, migrations became less
frequent; and various tribes, which had formerly separated, re-united
again; sometimes by compulsion and conquest, sometimes by accident,
and sometimes perhaps by compact. But though society had not it's
formal beginning from any convention of individuals, actuated by their
wants and their fears; yet it is the _sense_ of their weakness and
imperfection that _keeps_ mankind together; that demonstrates the
necessity of this union; and that therefore is the solid and natural
foundation, as well as the cement, of society. And this is what we
mean by the original contract of society; which, though perhaps in no
instance it has ever been formally expressed at the first institution
of a state, yet in nature and reason must always be understood and
implied, in the very act of associating together: namely, that the
whole should protect all it's parts, and that every part should pay
obedience to the will of the whole; or, in other words, that the
community should guard the rights of each individual member, and that
(in return for this protection) each individual should submit to the
laws of the community; without which submission of all it was
impossible that protection could be certainly extended to any.

FOR when society is once formed, government results of course, as
necessary to preserve and to keep that society in order. Unless some
superior were constituted, whose commands and decisions all the
members are bound to obey, they would still remain as in a state of
nature, without any judge upon earth to define their several rights,
and redress their several wrongs. But, as all the members of society
are naturally equal, it may be asked, in whose hands are the reins of
government to be entrusted? To this the general answer is easy; but
the application of it to particular cases has occasioned one half of
those mischiefs which are apt to proceed from misguided political
zeal. In general, all mankind will agree that government should be
reposed in such persons, in whom those qualities are most likely to be
found, the perfection of which are among the attributes of him who is
emphatically stiled the supreme being; the three grand requisites, I
mean, of wisdom, of goodness, and of power: wisdom, to discern the
real interest of the community; goodness, to endeavour always to
pursue that real interest; and strength, or power, to carry this
knowlege and intention into action. These are the natural foundations
of sovereignty, and these are the requisites that ought to be found in
every well constituted frame of government.

HOW the several forms of government we now see in the world at first
actually began, is matter of great uncertainty, and has occasioned
infinite disputes. It is not my business or intention to enter into
any of them. However they began, or by what right soever they
subsist, there is and must be in all of them a supreme, irresistible,
absolute, uncontrolled authority, in which the _jura summi imperii_,
or the rights of sovereignty, reside. And this authority is placed in
those hands, wherein (according to the opinion of the founders of such
respective states, either expressly given, or collected from their
tacit approbation) the qualities requisite for supremacy, wisdom,
goodness, and power, are the most likely to be found.

THE political writers of antiquity will not allow more than three
regular forms of government; the first, when the sovereign power is
lodged in an aggregate assembly consisting of all the members of a
community, which is called a democracy; the second, when it is lodged
in a council, composed of select members, and then it is stiled an
aristocracy; the last, when it is entrusted in the hands of a single
person, and then it takes the name of a monarchy. All other species of
government, they say, are either corruptions of, or reducible to,
these three.

BY the sovereign power, as was before observed, is meant the making of
laws; for wherever that power resides, all others must conform to, and
be directed by it, whatever appearance the outward form and
administration of the government may put on. For it is at any time in
the option of the legislature to alter that form and administration by
a new edict or rule, and to put the execution of the laws into
whatever hands it pleases: and all the other powers of the state must
obey the legislative power in the execution of their several
functions, or else the constitution is at an end.

IN a democracy, where the right of making laws resides in the people
at large, public virtue, or goodness of intention, is more likely to
be found, than either of the other qualities of government. Popular
assemblies are frequently foolish in their contrivance, and weak in
their execution; but generally mean to do the thing that is right and
just, and have always a degree of patriotism or public spirit. In
aristocracies there is more wisdom to be found, than in the other
frames of government; being composed, or intended to be composed, of
the most experienced citizens; but there is less honesty than in a
republic, and less strength than in a monarchy. A monarchy is indeed
the most powerful of any, all the sinews of government being knit
together, and united in the hand of the prince; but then there is
imminent danger of his employing that strength to improvident or
oppressive purposes.

THUS these three species of government have, all of them, their
several perfections and imperfections. Democracies are usually the
best calculated to direct the end of a law; aristocracies to invent
the means by which that end shall be obtained; and monarchies to carry
those means into execution. And the antients, as was observed, had in
general no idea of any other permanent form of government but these
three; for though Cicero[f] declares himself of opinion, "_esse optime
constitutam rempublicam, quae ex tribus generibus illis, regali,
optimo, et populari, sit modice confusa_;" yet Tacitus treats this
notion of a mixed government, formed out of them all, and partaking of
the advantages of each, as a visionary whim; and one that, if
effected, could never be lasting or secure[g].

[Footnote f: In his fragments _de rep._ _l._ 2.]

[Footnote g: "_Cunctas nationes et urbes populus, aut primores, aut
singuli regunt: delecta ex his, et constituta reipublicae forma
laudari facilius quam evenire, vel, si evenit, haud diuturna esse
potest._" _Ann._ _l._ 4.]

BUT happily for us of this island, the British constitution has long
remained, and I trust will long continue, a standing exception to the
truth of this observation. For, as with us the executive power of the
laws is lodged in a single person, they have all the advantages of
strength and dispatch, that are to be found in the most absolute
monarchy; and, as the legislature of the kingdom is entrusted to three
distinct powers, entirely independent of each other; first, the king;
secondly, the lords spiritual and temporal, which is an aristocratical
assembly of persons selected for their piety, their birth, their
wisdom, their valour, or their property; and, thirdly, the house of
commons, freely chosen by the people from among themselves, which
makes it a kind of democracy; as this aggregate body, actuated by
different springs, and attentive to different interests, composes the
British parliament, and has the supreme disposal of every thing; there
can no inconvenience be attempted by either of the three branches, but
will be withstood by one of the other two; each branch being armed
with a negative power, sufficient to repel any innovation which it
shall think inexpedient or dangerous.

HERE then is lodged the sovereignty of the British constitution; and
lodged as beneficially as is possible for society. For in no other
shape could we be so certain of finding the three great qualities of
government so well and so happily united. If the supreme power were
lodged in any one of the three branches separately, we must be exposed
to the inconveniences of either absolute monarchy, aristocracy, or
democracy; and so want two of the three principal ingredients of good
polity, either virtue, wisdom, or power. If it were lodged in any two
of the branches; for instance, in the king and house of lords, our
laws might be providently made, and well executed, but they might not
always have the good of the people in view: if lodged in the king and
commons, we should want that circumspection and mediatory caution,
which the wisdom of the peers is to afford: if the supreme rights of
legislature were lodged in the two houses only, and the king had no
negative upon their proceedings, they might be tempted to encroach
upon the royal prerogative, or perhaps to abolish the kingly office,
and thereby weaken (if not totally destroy) the strength of the
executive power. But the constitutional government of this island is
so admirably tempered and compounded, that nothing can endanger or
hurt it, but destroying the equilibrium of power between one branch of
the legislature and the rest. For if ever it should happen that the
independence of any one of the three should be lost, or that it should
become subservient to the views of either of the other two, there
would soon be an end of our constitution. The legislature would be
changed from that, which was originally set up by the general consent
and fundamental act of the society; and such a change, however
effected, is according to Mr Locke[h] (who perhaps carries his theory
too far) at once an entire dissolution of the bands of government; and
the people would be reduced to a state of anarchy, with liberty to
constitute to themselves a new legislative power.

[Footnote h: On government, part 2. §. 212.]

HAVING thus cursorily considered the three usual species of
government, and our own singular constitution, selected and compounded
from them all, I proceed to observe, that, as the power of making laws
constitutes the supreme authority, so wherever the supreme authority
in any state resides, it is the right of that authority to make laws;
that is, in the words of our definition, _to prescribe the rule of
civil action_. And this may be discovered from the very end and
institution of civil states. For a state is a collective body,
composed of a multitude of individuals, united for their safety and
convenience, and intending to act together as one man. If it therefore
is to act as one man, it ought to act by one uniform will. But,
inasmuch as political communities are made up of many natural persons,
each of whom has his particular will and inclination, these several
wills cannot by any _natural_ union be joined together, or tempered
and disposed into a lasting harmony, so as to constitute and produce
that one uniform will of the whole. It can therefore be no otherwise
produced than by a _political_ union; by the consent of all persons to
submit their own private wills to the will of one man, or of one or
more assemblies of men, to whom the supreme authority is entrusted:
and this will of that one man, or assemblage of men, is in different
states, according to their different constitutions, understood to be
_law_.

THUS far as to the _right_ of the supreme power to make laws; but
farther, it is it's _duty_ likewise. For since the respective members
are bound to conform themselves to the will of the state, it is
expedient that they receive directions from the state declaratory of
that it's will. But since it is impossible, in so great a multitude,
to give injunctions to every particular man, relative to each
particular action, therefore the state establishes general rules, for
the perpetual information and direction of all persons in all points,
whether of positive or negative duty. And this, in order that every
man may know what to look upon as his own, what as another's; what
absolute and what relative duties are required at his hands; what is
to be esteemed honest, dishonest, or indifferent; what degree every
man retains of his natural liberty; what he has given up as the price
of the benefits of society; and after what manner each person is to
moderate the use and exercise of those rights which the state assigns
him, in order to promote and secure the public tranquillity.

FROM what has been advanced, the truth of the former branch of our
definition, is (I trust) sufficiently evident; that "_municipal law is
a rule of civil conduct prescribed by the supreme power in a state_."
I proceed now to the latter branch of it; that it is a rule so
prescribed, "_commanding what is right, and prohibiting what is
wrong_."

NOW in order to do this completely, it is first of all necessary that
the boundaries of right and wrong be established and ascertained by
law. And when this is once done, it will follow of course that it is
likewise the business of the law, considered as a rule of civil
conduct, to enforce these rights and to restrain or redress these
wrongs. It remains therefore only to consider in what manner the law
is said to ascertain the boundaries of right and wrong; and the
methods which it takes to command the one and prohibit the other.

FOR this purpose every law may be said to consist of several parts:
one, _declaratory_; whereby the rights to be observed, and the wrongs
to be eschewed, are clearly defined and laid down: another,
_directory_, whereby the subject is instructed and enjoined to observe
those rights, and to abstain from the commission of those wrongs: a
third, _remedial_; whereby a method is pointed out to recover a man's
private rights, or redress his private wrongs: to which may be added a
fourth, usually termed the _sanction_, or _vindicatory_ branch of the
law; whereby it is signified what evil or penalty shall be incurred by
such as commit any public wrongs, and transgress or neglect their
duty.

WITH regard to the first of these, the _declaratory_ part of the
municipal law, this depends not so much upon the law of revelation or
of nature, as upon the wisdom and will of the legislator. This
doctrine, which before was slightly touched, deserves a more
particular explication. Those rights then which God and nature have
established, and are therefore called natural rights, such as are life
and liberty, need not the aid of human laws to be more effectually
invested in every man than they are; neither do they receive any
additional strength when declared by the municipal laws to be
inviolable. On the contrary, no human legislature has power to abridge
or destroy them, unless the owner shall himself commit some act that
amounts to a forfeiture. Neither do divine or natural _duties_ (such
as, for instance, the worship of God, the maintenance of children, and
the like) receive any stronger sanction from being also declared to be
duties by the law of the land. The case is the same as to crimes and
misdemesnors, that are forbidden by the superior laws, and therefore
stiled _mala in se_, such as murder, theft, and perjury; which
contract no additional turpitude from being declared unlawful by the
inferior legislature. For that legislature in all these cases acts
only, as was before observed, in subordination to the great lawgiver,
transcribing and publishing his precepts. So that, upon the whole, the
declaratory part of the municipal law has no force or operation at
all, with regard to actions that are naturally and intrinsically right
or wrong.

BUT with regard to things in themselves indifferent, the case is
entirely altered. These become either right or wrong, just or unjust,
duties or misdemesnors, according as the municipal legislator sees
proper, for promoting the welfare of the society, and more effectually
carrying on the purposes of civil life. Thus our own common law has
declared, that the goods of the wife do instantly upon marriage become
the property and right of the husband; and our statute law has
declared all monopolies a public offence: yet that right, and this
offence, have no foundation in nature; but are merely created by the
law, for the purposes of civil society. And sometimes, where the thing
itself has it's rise from the law of nature, the particular
circumstances and mode of doing it become right or wrong, as the laws
of the land shall direct. Thus, for instance, in civil duties;
obedience to superiors is the doctrine of revealed as well as natural
religion: but who those superiors shall be, and in what circumstances,
or to what degrees they shall be obeyed, is the province of human laws
to determine. And so, as to injuries or crimes, it must be left to our
own legislature to decide, in what cases the seising another's cattle
shall amount to the crime of robbery; and where it shall be a
justifiable action, as when a landlord takes them by way of distress
for rent.

THUS much for the _declaratory_ part of the municipal law: and the
_directory_ stands much upon the same footing; for this virtually
includes the former, the declaration being usually collected from the
direction. The law that says, "thou shalt not steal," implies a
declaration that stealing is a crime. And we have seen that, in things
naturally indifferent, the very essence of right and wrong depends
upon the direction of the laws to do or to omit it.

THE _remedial_ part of a law is so necessary a consequence of the
former two, that laws must be very vague and imperfect without it. For
in vain would rights be declared, in vain directed to be observed, if
there were no method of recovering and asserting those rights, when
wrongfully withheld or invaded. This is what we mean properly, when we
speak of the protection of the law. When, for instance, the
_declaratory_ part of the law has said "that the field or inheritance,
which belonged to Titius's father, is vested by his death in Titius;"
and the _directory_ part has "forbidden any one to enter on another's
property without the leave of the owner;" if Gaius after this will
presume to take possession of the land, the _remedial_ part of the law
will then interpose it's office; will make Gaius restore the
possession to Titius, and also pay him damages for the invasion.

WITH regard to the _sanction_ of laws, or the evil that may attend the
breach of public duties; it is observed, that human legislators have
for the most part chosen to make the sanction of their laws rather
_vindicatory_ than _remuneratory_, or to consist rather in
punishments, than in actual particular rewards. Because, in the first
place, the quiet enjoyment and protection of all our civil rights and
liberties, which are the sure and general consequence of obedience to
the municipal law, are in themselves the best and most valuable of all
rewards. Because also, were the exercise of every virtue to be
enforced by the proposal of particular rewards, it were impossible for
any state to furnish stock enough for so profuse a bounty. And
farther, because the dread of evil is a much more forcible principle
of human actions than the prospect of good[i]. For which reasons,
though a prudent bestowing of rewards is sometimes of exquisite use,
yet we find that those civil laws, which enforce and enjoin our duty,
do seldom, if ever, propose any privilege or gift to such as obey the
law; but do constantly come armed with a penalty denounced against
transgressors, either expressly defining the nature and quantity of
the punishment, or else leaving it to the discretion of the judges,
and those who are entrusted with the care of putting the laws in
execution.

[Footnote i: Locke, Hum. Und. b. 2. c. 21.]

OF all the parts of a law the most effectual is the _vindicatory_. For
it is but lost labour to say, "do this, or avoid that," unless we also
declare, "this shall be the consequence of your noncompliance." We
must therefore observe, that the main strength and force of a law
consists in the penalty annexed to it. Herein is to be found the
principal obligation of human laws.

LEGISLATORS and their laws are said to _compel_ and _oblige_; not that
by any natural violence they so constrain a man, as to render it
impossible for him to act otherwise than as they direct, which is the
strict sense of obligation: but because, by declaring and exhibiting a
penalty against offenders, they bring it to pass that no man can
easily choose to transgress the law; since, by reason of the impending
correction, compliance is in a high degree preferable to disobedience.
And, even where rewards are proposed as well as punishments
threatened, the obligation of the law seems chiefly to consist in the
penalty: for rewards, in their nature, can only _persuade_ and
_allure_; nothing is _compulsory_ but punishment.

IT is held, it is true, and very justly, by the principal of our
ethical writers, that human laws are binding upon mens consciences.
But if that were the only, or most forcible obligation, the good only
would regard the laws, and the bad would set them at defiance. And,
true as this principle is, it must still be understood with some
restriction. It holds, I apprehend, as to _rights_; and that, when the
law has determined the field to belong to Titius, it is matter of
conscience no longer to withhold or to invade it. So also in regard to
_natural duties_, and such offences as are _mala in se_: here we are
bound in conscience, because we are bound by superior laws, before
those human laws were in being, to perform the one and abstain from
the other. But in relation to those laws which enjoin only _positive
duties_, and forbid only such things as are not _mala in se_ but _mala
prohibita_ merely, annexing a penalty to noncompliance, here I
apprehend conscience is no farther concerned, than by directing a
submission to the penalty, in case of our breach of those laws: for
otherwise the multitude of penal laws in a state would not only be
looked upon as an impolitic, but would also be a very wicked thing; if
every such law were a snare for the conscience of the subject. But in
these cases the alternative is offered to every man; "either abstain
from this, or submit to such a penalty;" and his conscience will be
clear, whichever side of the alternative he thinks proper to embrace.
Thus, by the statutes for preserving the game, a penalty is denounced
against every unqualified person that kills a hare. Now this
prohibitory law does not make the transgression a moral offence: the
only obligation in conscience is to submit to the penalty if levied.

I HAVE now gone through the definition laid down of a municipal law;
and have shewn that it is "a rule--of civil conduct--prescribed--by
the supreme power in a state--commanding what is right, and
prohibiting what is wrong:" in the explication of which I have
endeavoured to interweave a few useful principles, concerning the
nature of civil government, and the obligation of human laws. Before I
conclude this section, it may not be amiss to add a few observations
concerning the _interpretation_ of laws.

WHEN any doubt arose upon the construction of the Roman laws, the
usage was to state the case to the emperor in writing, and take his
opinion upon it. This was certainly a bad method of interpretation. To
interrogate the legislature to decide particular disputes, is not only
endless, but affords great room for partiality and oppression. The
answers of the emperor were called his rescripts, and these had in
succeeding cases the force of perpetual laws; though they ought to be
carefully distinguished, by every rational civilian, from those
general constitutions, which had only the nature of things for their
guide. The emperor Macrinus, as his historian Capitolinus informs us,
had once resolved to abolish these rescripts, and retain only the
general edicts; he could not bear that the hasty and crude answers of
such princes as Commodus and Caracalla should be reverenced as laws.
But Justinian thought otherwise[k], and he has preserved them all. In
like manner the canon laws, or decretal epistles of the popes, are all
of them rescripts in the strictest sense. Contrary to all true forms
of reasoning, they argue from particulars to generals.

[Footnote k: _Inst._ 1. 2. 6.]

THE fairest and most rational method to interpret the will of the
legislator, is by exploring his intentions at the time when the law
was made, by _signs_ the most natural and probable. And these signs
are either the words, the context, the subject matter, the effects and
consequence, or the spirit and reason of the law. Let us take a short
view of them all.

1. WORDS are generally to be understood in their usual and most known
signification; not so much regarding the propriety of grammar, as
their general and popular use. Thus the law mentioned by
Puffendorf[l], which forbad a layman to _lay hands_ on a priest, was
adjudged to extend to him, who had hurt a priest with a weapon. Again;
terms of art, or technical terms, must be taken according to the
acceptation of the learned in each art, trade, and science. So in the
act of settlement, where the crown of England is limited "to the
princess Sophia, and the heirs of her body, being protestants," it
becomes necessary to call in the assistance of lawyers, to ascertain
the precise idea of the words "_heirs of her body_;" which in a legal
sense comprize only certain of her lineal descendants. Lastly, where
words are clearly _repugnant_ in two laws, the later law takes place
of the elder: _leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant_ is a
maxim of universal law, as well as of our own constitutions. And
accordingly it was laid down by a law of the twelve tables at Rome,
_quod populus postremum jussit, id jus ratum esto_.

[Footnote l: L. of N. and N. 5. 12. 3.]

2. IF words happen to be still dubious, we may establish their meaning
from the context; with which it may be of singular use to compare a
word, or a sentence, whenever they are ambiguous, equivocal, or
intricate. Thus the proeme, or preamble, is often called in to help
the construction of an act of parliament. Of the same nature and use
is the comparison of a law with other laws, that are made by the same
legislator, that have some affinity with the subject, or that
expressly relate to the same point. Thus, when the law of England
declares murder to be felony without benefit of clergy, we must resort
to the same law of England to learn what the benefit of clergy is:
and, when the common law censures simoniacal contracts, it affords
great light to the subject to consider what the canon law has adjudged
to be simony.

3. AS to the subject matter, words are always to be understood as
having a regard thereto; for that is always supposed to be in the eye
of the legislator, and all his expressions directed to that end. Thus,
when a law of our Edward III. forbids all ecclesiastical persons to
purchase _provisions_ at Rome, it might seem to prohibit the buying of
grain and other victual; but when we consider that the statute was
made to repress the usurpations of the papal see, and that the
nominations to vacant benefices by the pope were called _provisions_,
we shall see that the restraint is intended to be laid upon such
provisions only.

4. AS to the effects and consequence, the rule is, where words bear
either none, or a very absurd signification, if literally understood,
we must a little deviate from the received sense of them. Therefore
the Bolognian law, mentioned by Puffendorf[m], which enacted "that
whoever drew blood in the streets should be punished with the utmost
severity," was held after long debate not to extend to the surgeon,
who opened the vein of a person that fell down in the street with a
fit.

[Footnote m: _l._ 5. _c._ 12. §. 8.]

5. BUT, lastly, the most universal and effectual way of discovering
the true meaning of a law, when the words are dubious, is by
considering the reason and spirit of it; or the cause which moved the
legislator to enact it. For when this reason ceases, the law itself
ought likewise to cease with it. An instance of this is given in a
case put by Cicero, or whoever was the author of the rhetorical
treatise inscribed to Herennius[n]. There was a law, that those who in
a storm forsook the ship should forfeit all property therein; and the
ship and lading should belong entirely to those who staid in it. In a
dangerous tempest all the mariners forsook the ship, except only one
sick passenger, who by reason of his disease was unable to get out and
escape. By chance the ship came safe to port. The sick man kept
possession and claimed the benefit of the law. Now here all the
learned agree, that the sick man is not within the reason of the law;
for the reason of making it was, to give encouragement to such as
should venture their lives to save the vessel: but this is a merit,
which he could never pretend to, who neither staid in the ship upon
that account, nor contributed any thing to it's preservation.

[Footnote n: _l._ 1. _c._ 11.]

FROM this method of interpreting laws, by the reason of them, arises
what we call _equity_; which is thus defined by Grotius[o], "the
correction of that, wherein the law (by reason of its universality) is
deficient." For since in laws all cases cannot be foreseen or
expressed, it is necessary, that when the general decrees of the law
come to be applied to particular cases, there should be somewhere a
power vested of excepting those circumstances, which (had they been
foreseen) the legislator himself would have excepted. And these are
the cases, which, as Grotius expresses it, "_lex non exacte definit,
sed arbitrio boni viri permittit_."

[Footnote o: _de aequitate._]

EQUITY thus depending, essentially, upon the particular circumstances
of each individual case, there can be no established rules and fixed
precepts of equity laid down, without destroying it's very essence,
and reducing it to a positive law. And, on the other hand, the liberty
of considering all cases in an equitable light must not be indulged
too far, lest thereby we destroy all law, and leave the decision of
every question entirely in the breast of the judge. And law, without
equity, tho' hard and disagreeable, is much more desirable for the
public good, than equity without law; which would make every judge a
legislator, and introduce most infinite confusion; as there would then
be almost as many different rules of action laid down in our courts,
as there are differences of capacity and sentiment in the human mind.




SECTION THE THIRD.

OF THE LAWS OF ENGLAND.


THE municipal law of England, or the rule of civil conduct prescribed
to the inhabitants of this kingdom, may with sufficient propriety be
divided into two kinds; the _lex non scripta_, the unwritten, or
common law; and the _lex scripta_, the written, or statute law.

THE _lex non scripta_, or unwritten law, includes not only _general
customs_, or the common law properly so called; but also the
_particular customs_ of certain parts of the kingdom; and likewise
those _particular laws_, that are by custom observed only in certain
courts and jurisdictions.

WHEN I call these parts of our law _leges non scriptae_, I would not
be understood as if all those laws were at present merely _oral_, or
communicated from the former ages to the present solely by word of
mouth. It is true indeed that, in the profound ignorance of letters
which formerly overspread the whole western world, all laws were
intirely traditional, for this plain reason, that the nations among
which they prevailed had but little idea of writing. Thus the British
as well as the Gallic druids committed all their laws as well as
learning to memory[a]; and it is said of the primitive Saxons here, as
well as their brethren on the continent, that _leges sola memoria et
usu retinebant_[b]. But with us at present the monuments and evidences
of our legal customs are contained in the records of the several
courts of justice, in books of reports and judicial decisions, and in
the treatises of learned sages of the profession, preserved and handed
down to us from the times of highest antiquity. However I therefore
stile these parts of our law _leges non scriptae_, because their
original institution and authority are not set down in writing, as
acts of parliament are, but they receive their binding power, and the
force of laws, by long and immemorial usage, and by their universal
reception throughout the kingdom. In like manner as Aulus Gellius
defines the _jus non scriptum_ to be that, which is "_tacito et
illiterato hominum consensu et moribus expressum_."

[Footnote a: _Caes. de b. G._ _lib._ 6. _c._ 13.]

[Footnote b: Spelm. Gl. 362.]

OUR antient lawyers, and particularly Fortescue[c], insist with
abundance of warmth, that these customs are as old as the primitive
Britons, and continued down, through the several mutations of
government and inhabitants, to the present time, unchanged and
unadulterated. This may be the case as to some; but in general, as Mr
Selden in his notes observes, this assertion must be understood with
many grains of allowance; and ought only to signify, as the truth
seems to be, that there never was any formal exchange of one system of
laws for another: though doubtless by the intermixture of adventitious
nations, the Romans, the Picts, the Saxons, the Danes, and the
Normans, they must have insensibly introduced and incorporated many of
their own customs with those that were before established: thereby in
all probability improving the texture and wisdom of the whole, by the
accumulated wisdom of divers particular countries. Our laws, saith
lord Bacon[d], are mixed as our language: and as our language is so
much the richer, the laws are the more complete.

[Footnote c: _c._ 17.]

[Footnote d: See his proposals for a digest.]

AND indeed our antiquarians and first historians do all positively
assure us, that our body of laws is of this compounded nature. For
they tell us, that in the time of Alfred the local customs of the
several provinces of the kingdom were grown so various, that he found
it expedient to compile his _dome-book_ or _liber judicialis_, for the
general use of the whole kingdom. This book is said to have been
extant so late as the reign of king Edward the fourth, but is now
unfortunately lost. It contained, we may probably suppose, the
principal maxims of the common law, the penalties for misdemesnors,
and the forms of judicial proceedings. Thus much may at least be
collected from that injunction to observe it, which we find in the
laws of king Edward the elder, the son of Alfred[e]. "_Omnibus qui
reipublicae praesunt, etiam atque etiam mando, ut omnibus aequos se
praebeant judices, perinde ac in judiciali libro_ (_Saxonice_,
[Anglo-Saxon: dom-bec]) _scriptum habetur; nec quicquam formident quin
jus commune_ (_Saxonice_, [Anglo-Saxon: folcrihte]) _audacter
libereque dicant._"

[Footnote e: _c._ 1.]

BUT the irruption and establishment of the Danes in England which
followed soon after, introduced new customs and caused this code of
Alfred in many provinces to fall into disuse; or at least to be mixed
and debased with other laws of a coarser alloy. So that about the
beginning of the eleventh century there were three principal systems
of laws prevailing in different districts. 1. The _Mercen-Lage_, or
Mercian laws, which were observed in many of the midland counties, and
those bordering on the principality of Wales; the retreat of the
antient Britons; and therefore very probably intermixed with the
British or Druidical customs. 2. The _West-Saxon-Lage_, or laws of the
west Saxons, which obtained in the counties to the south and west of
the island, from Kent to Devonshire. These were probably much the same
with the laws of Alfred abovementioned, being the municipal law of the
far most considerable part of his dominions, and particularly
including Berkshire, the seat of his peculiar residence. 3. The
_Dane-Lage_, or Danish law, the very name of which speaks it's
original and composition. This was principally maintained in the rest
of the midland counties, and also on the eastern coast, the seat of
that piratical people. As for the very northern provinces, they were
at that time under a distinct government[f].

[Footnote f: Hal. Hist. 55.]

OUT of these three laws, Roger Hoveden[g] and Ranulphus Cestrensis[h]
inform us, king Edward the confessor extracted one uniform law or
digest of laws, to be observed throughout the whole kingdom; though
Hoveden and the author of an old manuscript chronicle[i] assure us
likewise, that this work was projected and begun by his grandfather
king Edgar. And indeed a general digest of the same nature has been
constantly found expedient, and therefore put in practice by other
great nations, formed from an assemblage of little provinces, governed
by peculiar customs. As in Portugal, under king Edward, about the
beginning of the fifteenth century[k]. In Spain under Alonzo X, who
about the year 1250 executed the plan of his father St. Ferdinand, and
collected all the provincial customs into one uniform law, in the
celebrated code entitled _las partidas_[l]. And in Sweden about the
same aera, a universal body of common law was compiled out of the
particular customs established by the laghman of every province, and
intitled the _land's lagh_, being analogous to the _common law_ of
England[m].

[Footnote g: _in Hen. II._]

[Footnote h: _in Edw. Confessor._]

[Footnote i: _in Seld. ad Eadmer._ 6.]

[Footnote k: Mod. Un. Hist. xxii. 135.]

[Footnote l: Ibid. xx. 211.]

[Footnote m: Ibid. xxxiii. 21, 58.]

BOTH these undertakings, of king Edgar and Edward the confessor, seem
to have been no more than a new edition, or fresh promulgation, of
Alfred's code or dome-book, with such additions and improvements as
the experience of a century and an half had suggested. For Alfred is
generally stiled by the same historians the _legum Anglicanarum
conditor_, as Edward the confessor is the _restitutor_. These however
are the laws which our histories so often mention under the name of
the laws of Edward the confessor; which our ancestors struggled so
hardly to maintain, under the first princes of the Norman line; and
which subsequent princes so frequently promised to keep and to
restore, as the most popular act they could do, when pressed by
foreign emergencies or domestic discontents. These are the laws, that
so vigorously withstood the repeated attacks of the civil law; which
established in the twelfth century a new Roman empire over most of the
states on the continent: states that have lost, and perhaps upon that
account, their political liberties; while the free constitution of
England, perhaps upon the same account, has been rather improved than
debased. These, in short, are the laws which gave rise and original to
that collection of maxims and customs, which is now known by the name
of the common law. A name either given to it, in contradistinction to
other laws, as the statute law, the civil law, the law merchant, and
the like; or, more probably, as a law _common_ to all the realm, the
_jus commune_ or _folcright_ mentioned by king Edward the elder, after
the abolition of the several provincial customs and particular laws
beforementioned.

BUT though this is the most likely foundation of this collection of
maxims and customs, yet the maxims and customs, so collected, are of
higher antiquity than memory or history can reach: nothing being more
difficult than to ascertain the precise beginning and first spring of
an antient and long established custom. Whence it is that in our law
the goodness of a custom depends upon it's having been used time out
of mind; or, in the solemnity of our legal phrase, time whereof the
memory of man runneth not to the contrary. This it is that gives it
it's weight and authority; and of this nature are the maxims and
customs which compose the common law, or _lex non scripta_, of this
kingdom.

THIS unwritten, or common, law is properly distinguishable into three
kinds: 1. General customs; which are the universal rule of the whole
kingdom, and form the common law, in it's stricter and more usual
signification. 2. Particular customs; which for the most part affect
only the inhabitants of particular districts. 3. Certain particular
laws; which by custom are adopted and used by some particular courts,
of pretty general and extensive jurisdiction.

I. AS to general customs, or the common law, properly so called; this
is that law, by which proceedings and determinations in the king's
ordinary courts of justice are guided and directed. This, for the most
part, settles the course in which lands descend by inheritance; the
manner and form of acquiring and transferring property; the
solemnities and obligation of contracts; the rules of expounding
wills, deeds, and acts of parliament; the respective remedies of civil
injuries; the several species of temporal offences, with the manner
and degree of punishment; and an infinite number of minuter
particulars, which diffuse themselves as extensively as the ordinary
distribution of common justice requires. Thus, for example, that there
shall be four superior courts of record, the chancery, the king's
bench, the common pleas, and the exchequer;--that the eldest son alone
is heir to his ancestor;--that property may be acquired and
transferred by writing;--that a deed is of no validity unless
sealed;--that wills shall be construed more favorably, and deeds more
strictly;--that money lent upon bond is recoverable by action of
debt;--that breaking the public peace is an offence, and punishable by
fine and imprisonment;--all these are doctrines that are not set down
in any written statute or ordinance, but depend merely upon immemorial
usage, that is, upon common law, for their support.

SOME have divided the common law into two principal grounds or
foundations: 1. established customs; such as that where there are
three brothers, the eldest brother shall be heir to the second, in
exclusion of the youngest: and 2. established rules and maxims; as,
"that the king can do no wrong, that no man shall be bound to accuse
himself," and the like. But I take these to be one and the same thing.
For the authority of these maxims rests entirely upon general
reception and usage; and the only method of proving, that this or that
maxim is a rule of the common law, is by shewing that it hath been
always the custom to observe it.

BUT here a very natural, and very material, question arises: how are
these customs or maxims to be known, and by whom is their validity to
be determined? The answer is, by the judges in the several courts of
justice. They are the depositary of the laws; the living oracles, who
must decide in all cases of doubt, and who are bound by an oath to
decide according to the law of the land. Their knowlege of that law is
derived from experience and study; from the "_viginti annorum
lucubrationes_," which Fortescue[n] mentions; and from being long
personally accustomed to the judicial decisions of their predecessors.
And indeed these judicial decisions are the principal and most
authoritative evidence, that can be given, of the existence of such a
custom as shall form a part of the common law. The judgment itself,
and all the proceedings previous thereto, are carefully registered and
preserved, under the name of _records_, in publick repositories set
apart for that particular purpose; and to them frequent recourse is
had, when any critical question arises, in the determination of which
former precedents may give light or assistance. And therefore, even so
early as the conquest, we find the "_praeteritorum memoria eventorum_"
reckoned up as one of the chief qualifications of those who were held
to be "_legibus patriae optime instituti_[o]." For it is an
established rule to abide by former precedents, where the same points
come again in litigation; as well to keep the scale of justice even
and steady, and not liable to waver with every new judge's opinion; as
also because the law in that case being solemnly declared and
determined, what before was uncertain, and perhaps indifferent, is now
become a permanent rule, which it is not in the breast of any
subsequent judge to alter or vary from, according to his private
sentiments: he being sworn to determine, not according to his own
private judgment, but according to the known laws and customs of the
land; not delegated to pronounce a new law, but to maintain and
expound the old one. Yet this rule admits of exception, where the
former determination is most evidently contrary to reason; much more
if it be contrary to the divine law. But even in such cases the
subsequent judges do not pretend to make a new law, but to vindicate
the old one from misrepresentation. For if it be found that the former
decision is manifestly absurd or unjust, it is declared, not that such
a sentence was _bad law_, but that it was _not law_; that is, that it
is not the established custom of the realm, as has been erroneously
determined. And hence it is that our lawyers are with justice so
copious in their encomiums on the reason of the common law; that they
tell us, that the law is the perfection of reason, that it always
intends to conform thereto, and that what is not reason is not law.
Not that the particular reason of every rule in the law can at this
distance of time be always precisely assigned; but it is sufficient
that there be nothing in the rule flatly contradictory to reason, and
then the law will presume it to be well founded[p]. And it hath been
an antient observation in the laws of England, that whenever a
standing rule of law, of which the reason perhaps could not be
remembered or discerned, hath been wantonly broke in upon by statutes
or new resolutions, the wisdom of the rule hath in the end appeared
from the inconveniences that have followed the innovation.

[Footnote n: _cap._ 8.]

[Footnote o: Seld. review of Tith. c. 8.]

[Footnote p: Herein agreeing with the civil law, _Ff._ 1. 3. 20, 21.
"_Non omnium, quae a majoribus nostris constituta sunt, ratio reddi
potest. Et ideo rationes eorum quae constituuntur, inquiri non
oportet: alioquin multa ex his, quae certa sunt, subvertuntur._"]

THE doctrine of the law then is this: that precedents and rules must
be followed, unless flatly absurd or unjust: for though their reason
be not obvious at first view, yet we owe such a deference to former
times as not to suppose they acted wholly without consideration. To
illustrate this doctrine by examples. It has been determined, time out
of mind, that a brother of the half blood (i.e. where they have only
one parent the same, and the other different) shall never succeed as
heir to the estate of his half brother, but it shall rather escheat to
the king, or other superior lord. Now this is a positive law, fixed
and established by custom, which custom is evidenced by judicial
decisions; and therefore can never be departed from by any modern
judge without a breach of his oath and the law. For herein there is
nothing repugnant to natural justice; though the reason of it, drawn
from the feodal law, may not be quite obvious to every body. And
therefore, on account of a supposed hardship upon the half brother, a
modern judge might wish it had been otherwise settled; yet it is not
in his power to alter it. But if any court were now to determine, that
an elder brother of the half blood might enter upon and seise any
lands that were purchased by his younger brother, no subsequent judges
would scruple to declare that such prior determination was unjust, was
unreasonable, and therefore was _not law_. So that _the law_, and the
_opinion of the judge_ are not always convertible terms, or one and
the same thing; since it sometimes may happen that the judge may
_mistake_ the law. Upon the whole however, we may take it as a general
rule, "that the decisions of courts of justice are the evidence of
what is common law:" in the same manner as, in the civil law, what the
emperor had once determined was to serve for a guide for the
future[q].

[Footnote q: "_Si imperialis majestas causam cognitionaliter
examinaverit, et partibus cominus constitutis sententiam dixerit,
omnes omnino judices, qui sub nostro imperio sunt, sciant hanc esse
legem, non solum illi causae pro qua producta est, sed et in omnibus
similibus._" _C._ 1. 14. 12.]

THE decisions therefore of courts are held in the highest regard, and
are not only preserved as authentic records in the treasuries of the
several courts, but are handed out to public view in the numerous
volumes of _reports_ which furnish the lawyer's library. These reports
are histories of the several cases, with a short summary of the
proceedings, which are preserved at large in the record; the arguments
on both sides; and the reasons the court gave for their judgment;
taken down in short notes by persons present at the determination. And
these serve as indexes to, and also to explain, the records; which
always, in matters of consequence and nicety, the judges direct to be
searched. The reports are extant in a regular series from the reign of
king Edward the second inclusive; and from his time to that of Henry
the eighth were taken by the prothonotaries, or chief scribes of the
court, at the expence of the crown, and published _annually_, whence
they are known under the denomination of the _year books_. And it is
much to be wished that this beneficial custom had, under proper
regulations, been continued to this day: for, though king James the
first at the instance of lord Bacon appointed two reporters with a
handsome stipend for this purpose, yet that wise institution was soon
neglected, and from the reign of Henry the eighth to the present time
this task has been executed by many private and cotemporary hands; who
sometimes through haste and inaccuracy, sometimes through mistake and
want of skill, have published very crude and imperfect (perhaps
contradictory) accounts of one and the same determination. Some of the
most valuable of the antient reports are those published by lord chief
justice Coke; a man of infinite learning in his profession, though not
a little infected with the pedantry and quaintness of the times he
lived in, which appear strongly in all his works. However his writings
are so highly esteemed, that they are generally cited without the
author's name[r].

[Footnote r: His reports, for instance, are stiled, [Greek: kat'
exochên], _the reports_; and in quoting them we usually say, 1 or 2
Rep. not 1 or 2 Coke's Rep. as in citing other authors. The reports of
judge Croke are also cited in a peculiar manner, by the name of those
princes, in whose reigns the cases reported in his three volumes were
determined; viz. Qu. Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles the first; as
well as by the number of each volume. For sometimes we call them, 1,
2, and 3 Cro. but more commonly Cro. Eliz. Cro. Jac. and Cro. Car.]

BESIDES these reporters, there are also other authors, to whom great
veneration and respect is paid by the students of the common law. Such
are Glanvil and Bracton, Britton and Fleta, Littleton and Fitzherbert,
with some others of antient date, whose treatises are cited as
authority; and are evidence that cases have formerly happened in which
such and such points were determined, which are now become settled and
first principles. One of the last of these methodical writers in point
of time, whose works are of any intrinsic authority in the courts of
justice, and do not entirely depend on the strength of their
quotations from older authors, is the same learned judge we have just
mentioned, sir Edward Coke; who hath written four volumes of
institutes, as he is pleased to call them, though they have little of
the institutional method to warrant such a title. The first volume is
a very extensive comment upon a little excellent treatise of tenures,
compiled by judge Littleton in the reign of Edward the fourth. This
comment is a rich mine of valuable common law learning, collected and
heaped together from the antient reports and year books, but greatly
defective in method[s]. The second volume is a comment upon many old
acts of parliament, without any systematical order; the third a more
methodical treatise of the pleas of the crown; and the fourth an
account of the several species of courts[t].

[Footnote s: It is usually cited either by the name of Co. Litt. or as
1 Inst.]

[Footnote t: These are cited as 2, 3, or 4 Inst. without any author's
name. An honorary distinction, which, we observed, was paid to the
works of no other writer; the generality of reports and other tracts
being quoted in the name of the compiler, as 2 Ventris, 4 Leonard, 1
Siderfin, and the like.]

AND thus much for the first ground and chief corner stone of the laws
of England, which is, general immemorial custom, or common law, from
time to time declared in the decisions of the courts of justice; which
decisions are preserved among our public records, explained in our
reports, and digested for general use in the authoritative writings of
the venerable sages of the law.

THE Roman law, as practised in the times of it's liberty, paid also a
great regard to custom; but not so much as our law: it only then
adopting it, when the written law is deficient. Though the reasons
alleged in the digest[u] will fully justify our practice, in making it
of equal authority with, when it is not contradicted by, the written
law. "For since, says Julianus, the written law binds us for no other
reason but because it is approved by the judgment of the people,
therefore those laws which the people hath approved without writing
ought also to bind every body. For where is the difference, whether
the people declare their assent to a law by suffrage, or by a uniform
course of acting accordingly?" Thus did they reason while Rome had
some remains of her freedom; but when the imperial tyranny came to be
fully established, the civil laws speak a very different language.
"_Quod principi placuit legis habet vigorem, cum populus ei et in eum
omne suum imperium et potestatem conferat_," says Ulpian[w].
"_Imperator solus et conditor et interpres legis existimatur_," says
the code[x]. And again, "_sacrilegii instar est rescripto principis
obviare_[y]." And indeed it is one of the characteristic marks of
English liberty, that our common law depends upon custom; which
carries this internal evidence of freedom along with it, that it
probably was introduced by the voluntary consent of the people.

[Footnote u: _Ff._ 1. 3. 32.]

[Footnote w: _Ff._ 1. 4. 1.]

[Footnote x: _C._ 1. 14. 12.]

[Footnote y: _C._ 1. 23. 5.]

II. THE second branch of the unwritten laws of England are particular
customs, or laws which affect only the inhabitants of particular
districts.

THESE particular customs, or some of them, are without doubt the
remains of that multitude of local customs before mentioned, out of
which the common law, as it now stands, was collected at first by king
Alfred, and afterwards by king Edgar and Edward the confessor: each
district mutually sacrificing some of it's own special usages, in
order that the whole kingdom might enjoy the benefit of one uniform
and universal system of laws. But, for reasons that have been now long
forgotten, particular counties, cities, towns, manors, and lordships,
were very early indulged with the privilege of abiding by their own
customs, in contradistinction to the rest of the nation at large:
which privilege is confirmed to them by several acts of parliament[z].

[Footnote z: Mag. Cart. c. 9.--1 Edw. III. st. 2. c. 9.--14 Edw. III.
st. 1. c. 1.--and 2 Hen. IV. c. 1.]

SUCH is the custom of gavelkind in Kent and some other parts of the
kingdom (though perhaps it was also general till the Norman conquest)
which ordains, among other things, that not the eldest son only of the
father shall succeed to his inheritance, but all the sons alike: and
that, though the ancestor be attainted and hanged, yet the heir shall
succeed to his estate, without any escheat to the lord.--Such is the
custom that prevails in divers antient boroughs, and therefore called
borough-english, that the youngest son shall inherit the estate, in
preference to all his elder brothers.--Such is the custom in other
boroughs that a widow shall be intitled, for her dower, to all her
husband's lands; whereas at the common law she shall be endowed of one
third part only.--Such also are the special and particular customs of
manors, of which every one has more or less, and which bind all the
copyhold-tenants that hold of the said manors.--Such likewise is the
custom of holding divers inferior courts, with power of trying causes,
in cities and trading towns; the right of holding which, when no royal
grant can be shewn, depends entirely upon immemorial and established
usage.--Such, lastly, are many particular customs within the city of
London, with regard to trade, apprentices, widows, orphans, and a
variety of other matters; which are all contrary to the general law of
the land, and are good only by special custom, though those of London
are also confirmed by act of parliament[a].

[Footnote a: 8 Rep. 126. Cro. Car. 347.]

TO this head may most properly be referred a particular system of
customs used only among one set of the king's subjects, called the
custom of merchants or _lex mercatoria_; which, however different from
the common law, is allowed for the benefit of trade, to be of the
utmost validity in all commercial transactions; the maxim of law
being, that "_cuilibet in sua arte credendum est_."

THE rules relating to particular customs regard either the proof of
their existence; their legality when proved; or their usual method of
allowance. And first we will consider the rules of proof.

AS to gavelkind, and borough-english, the law takes particular notice
of them[b], and there is no occasion to prove that such customs
actually exist, but only that the lands in question are subject
thereto. All other private customs must be particularly pleaded[c],
and as well the existence of such customs must be shewn, as that the
thing in dispute is within the custom alleged. The trial in both cases
(both to shew the existence of the custom, as, "that in the manor of
Dale lands shall descend only to the heirs male, and never to the
heirs female;" and also to shew that the lands in question are within
that manor) is by a jury of twelve men, and not by the judges, except
the same particular custom has been before tried, determined, and
recorded in the same court[d].

[Footnote b: Co. Litt. 175 _b._]

[Footnote c: Litt. §. 265.]

[Footnote d: Dr and St. 1. 10.]

THE customs of London differ from all others in point of trial: for,
if the existence of the custom be brought in question, it shall not be
tried by a jury, but by certificate from the lord mayor and aldermen
by the mouth of their recorder[e]; unless it be such a custom as the
corporation is itself interested in, as a right of taking toll, &c,
for then the law permits them not to certify on their own behalf[f].

[Footnote e: Cro. Car. 516.]

[Footnote f: Hob. 85.]

WHEN a custom is actually proved to exist, the next enquiry is into
the legality of it; for if it is not a good custom it ought to be no
longer used. "_Malus usus abolendus est_" is an established maxim of
the law[g]. To make a particular custom good, the following are
necessary requisites.

[Footnote g: Litt. §. 212. 4 Inst. 274.]

1. THAT it have been used so long, that the memory of man runneth not
to the contrary. So that if any one can shew the beginning of it, it
is no good custom. For which reason no custom can prevail against an
express act of parliament; since the statute itself is a proof of a
time when such a custom did not exist[h].

[Footnote h: Co. Litt. 113 _b._]

2. IT must have been _continued_. Any interruption would cause a
temporary ceasing: the revival gives it a new beginning, which will be
within time of memory, and thereupon the custom will be void. But this
must be understood with regard to an interruption of the _right_; for
an interruption of the _possession_ only, for ten or twenty years,
will not destroy the custom[i]. As if I have a right of way by custom
over another's field, the custom is not destroyed, though I do not
pass over it for ten years; it only becomes more difficult to prove:
but if the _right_ be any how discontinued for a day, the custom is
quite at an end.

[Footnote i: Co. Litt. 114 _b._]

3. IT must have been _peaceable_, and acquiesced in; not subject to
contention and dispute[k]. For as customs owe their original to common
consent, their being immemorially disputed either at law or otherwise
is a proof that such consent was wanting.

[Footnote k: Co. Litt. 114.]

4. CUSTOMS must be _reasonable_[l]; or rather, taken negatively, they
must not be unreasonable. Which is not always, as sir Edward Coke
says[m], to be understood of every unlearned man's reason, but of
artificial and legal reason, warranted by authority of law. Upon which
account a custom may be good, though the particular reason of it
cannot be assigned; for it sufficeth, if no good legal reason can be
assigned against it. Thus a custom in a parish, that no man shall put
his beasts into the common till the third of october, would be good;
and yet it would be hard to shew the reason why that day in particular
is fixed upon, rather than the day before or after. But a custom that
no cattle shall be put in till the lord of the manor has first put in
his, is unreasonable, and therefore bad: for peradventure the lord
will never put in his; and then the tenants will lose all their
profits[n].

[Footnote l: Litt. §. 212.]

[Footnote m: 1 Inst. 62.]

[Footnote n: Co. Copyh. §. 33.]

5. CUSTOMS ought to be _certain_. A custom, that lands shall descend
to the most worthy of the owner's blood, is void; for how shall this
worth be determined? But a custom to descend to the next male of the
blood, exclusive of females, is certain, and therefore good[o]. A
custom, to pay two pence an acre in lieu of tythes, is good; but to
pay sometimes two pence and sometimes three pence, as the occupier of
the land pleases, is bad for it's uncertainty. Yet a custom, to pay a
year's improved value for a fine on a copyhold estate, is good: though
the value is a thing uncertain. For the value may at any time be
ascertained; and the maxim of law is, _id certum est, quod certum
reddi potest_.

[Footnote o: 1 Roll. Abr. 565.]

6. CUSTOMS, though established by consent, must be (when established)
_compulsory_; and not left to the option of every man, whether he will
use them or no. Therefore a custom, that all the inhabitants shall be
rated toward the maintenance of a bridge, will be good; but a custom,
that every man is to contribute thereto at his own pleasure, is idle
and absurd, and, indeed, no custom at all.

7. LASTLY, customs must be _consistent_ with each other: one custom
cannot be set up in opposition to another. For if both are really
customs, then both are of equal antiquity, and both established by
mutual consent: which to say of contradictory customs is absurd.
Therefore, if one man prescribes that by custom he has a right to have
windows looking into another's garden; the other cannot claim a right
by custom to stop up or obstruct those windows: for these two
contradictory customs cannot both be good, nor both stand together. He
ought rather to deny the existence of the former custom[p].

[Footnote p: 9 Rep. 58.]

NEXT, as to the allowance of special customs. Customs, in derogation
of the common law, must be construed strictly. Thus, by the custom of
gavelkind, an infant of fifteen years may by one species of
conveyance (called a deed of feoffment) convey away his lands in fee
simple, or for ever. Yet this custom does not impower him to use any
other conveyance, or even to lease them for seven years: for the
custom must be strictly pursued[q]. And, moreover, all special customs
must submit to the king's prerogative. Therefore, if the king
purchases lands of the nature of gavelkind, where all the sons inherit
equally; yet, upon the king's demise, his eldest son shall succeed to
those lands alone[r]. And thus much for the second part of the _leges
non scriptae_, or those particular customs which affect particular
persons or districts only.

[Footnote q: Co. Cop. §. 33.]

[Footnote r: Co. Litt. 15 _b._]

III. THE third branch of them are those peculiar laws, which by custom
are adopted and used only in certain peculiar courts and
jurisdictions. And by these I understand the civil and canon laws.

IT may seem a little improper at first view to rank these laws under
the head of _leges non scriptae_, or unwritten laws, seeing they are
set forth by authority in their pandects, their codes, and their
institutions; their councils, decrees, and decretals; and enforced by
an immense number of expositions, decisions, and treatises of the
learned in both branches of the law. But I do this, after the example
of sir Matthew Hale[s], because it is most plain, that it is not on
account of their being _written_ laws, that either the canon law, or
the civil law, have any obligation within this kingdom; neither do
their force and efficacy depend upon their own intrinsic authority;
which is the case of our written laws, or acts of parliament. They
bind not the subjects of England, because their materials were
collected from popes or emperors; were digested by Justinian, or
declared to be authentic by Gregory. These considerations give them no
authority here: for the legislature of England doth not, nor ever did,
recognize any foreign power, as superior or equal to it in this
kingdom; or as having the right to give law to any, the meanest, of
it's subjects. But all the strength that either the papal or imperial
laws have obtained in this realm, or indeed in any other kingdom in
Europe, is only because they have been admitted and received by
immemorial usage and custom in some particular cases, and some
particular courts; and then they form a branch of the _leges non
scriptae_, or customary law: or else, because they are in some other
cases introduced by consent of parliament, and then they owe their
validity to the _leges scriptae_, or statute law. This is expressly
declared in those remarkable words of the statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 21.
addressed to the king's royal majesty.--"This your grace's realm,
recognizing no superior under God but only your grace, hath been and
is free from subjection to any man's laws, but only to such as have
been devised, made, and ordained _within_ this realm for the wealth of
the same; or to such other, as by sufferance of your grace and your
progenitors, the people of this your realm, have taken at their free
liberty, by their own consent, to be used among them; and have bound
themselves by long use and custom to the observance of the same: not
as to the observance of the laws of any foreign prince, potentate, or
prelate; but as to the _customed_ and antient laws of this realm,
originally established as laws of the same, by the said sufferance,
consents, and custom; and none otherwise."

[Footnote s: Hist. C.L. c. 2.]

BY the civil law, absolutely taken, is generally understood the civil
or municipal law of the Roman empire, as comprized in the institutes,
the code, and the digest of the emperor Justinian, and the novel
constitutions of himself and some of his successors. Of which, as
there will frequently be occasion to cite them, by way of illustrating
our own laws, it may not be amiss to give a short and general account.

THE Roman law (founded first upon the regal constitutions of their
antient kings, next upon the twelve tables of the _decemviri_, then
upon the laws or statutes enacted by the senate or people, the edicts
of the praetor, and the _responsa prudentum_ or opinions of learned
lawyers, and lastly upon the imperial decrees, or constitutions of
successive emperors) had grown to so great a bulk, or as Livy
expresses it[t], "_tam immensus aliarum super alias acervatarum legum
cumulus_," that they were computed to be many camels' load by an
author who preceded Justinian[u]. This was in part remedied by the
collections of three private lawyers, Gregorius, Hermogenes, and
Papirius; and then by the emperor Theodosius the younger, by whose
orders a code was compiled, _A.D._ 438, being a methodical collection
of all the imperial constitutions then in force: which Theodosian code
was the only book of civil law received as authentic in the western
part of Europe till many centuries after; and to this it is probable
that the Franks and Goths might frequently pay some regard, in framing
legal constitutions for their newly erected kingdoms. For Justinian
commanded only in the eastern remains of the empire; and it was under
his auspices, that the present body of civil law was compiled and
finished by Tribonian and other lawyers, about the year 533.

[Footnote t: _l._ 3. _c._ 34.]

[Footnote u: Taylor's elements of civil law. 17.]

THIS consists of, 1. The institutes, which contain the elements or
first principles of the Roman law, in four books. 2. The digests, or
pandects, in fifty books, containing the opinions and writings of
eminent lawyers, digested in a systematical method. 3. A new code, or
collection of imperial constitutions, the lapse of a whole century
having rendered the former code, of Theodosius, imperfect. 4. The
novels, or new constitutions, posterior in time to the other books,
and amounting to a supplement to the code; containing new decrees of
successive emperors, as new questions happened to arise. These form
the body of Roman law, or _corpus juris civilis_, as published about
the time of Justinian: which however fell soon into neglect and
oblivion, till about the year 1130, when a copy of the digests was
found at Amalfi in Italy; which accident, concurring with the policy
of the Romish ecclesiastics[w], suddenly gave new vogue and authority
to the civil law, introduced it into several nations, and occasioned
that mighty inundation of voluminous comments, with which this system
of law, more than any other, is now loaded.

[Footnote w: See §. 1. pag. 18.]

THE canon law is a body of Roman ecclesiastical law, relative to such
matters as that church either has, or pretends to have, the proper
jurisdiction over. This is compiled from the opinions of the antient
Latin fathers, the decrees of general councils, the decretal epistles
and bulles of the holy see. All which lay in the same disorder and
confusion as the Roman civil law, till about the year 1151, one
Gratian an Italian monk, animated by the discovery of Justinian's
pandects at Amalfi, reduced them into some method in three books,
which he entitled _concordia discordantium canonum_, but which are
generally known by the name of _decretum Gratiani_. These reached as
low as the time of pope Alexander III. The subsequent papal decrees,
to the pontificate of Gregory IX, were published in much the same
method under the auspices of that pope, about the year 1230, in five
books entitled _decretalia Gregorii noni_. A sixth book was added by
Boniface VIII, about the year 1298, which is called _sextus
decretalium_. The Clementine constitutions, or decrees of Clement V,
were in like manner authenticated in 1317 by his successor John XXII;
who also published twenty constitutions of his own, called the
_extravagantes Joannis_: all which in some measure answer to the
novels of the civil law. To these have been since added some decrees
of later popes in five books, called _extravagantes communes_. And all
these together, Gratian's decree, Gregory's decretals, the sixth
decretal, the Clementine constitutions, and the extravagants of John
and his successors, form the _corpus juris canonici_, or body of the
Roman canon law.

BESIDES these pontificial collections, which during the times of
popery were received as authentic in this island, as well as in other
parts of christendom, there is also a kind of national canon law,
composed of _legatine_ and _provincial_ constitutions, and adapted
only to the exigencies of this church and kingdom. The _legatine_
constitutions were ecclesiastical laws, enacted in national synods,
held under the cardinals Otho and Othobon, legates from pope Gregory
IX and pope Adrian IV, in the reign of king Henry III about the years
1220 and 1268. The _provincial_ constitutions are principally the
decrees of provincial synods, held under divers arch-bishops of
Canterbury, from Stephen Langton in the reign of Henry III to Henry
Chichele in the reign of Henry V; and adopted also by the province of
York[x] in the reign of Henry VI. At the dawn of the reformation, in
the reign of king Henry VIII, it was enacted in parliament[y] that a
review should be had of the canon law; and, till such review should be
made, all canons, constitutions, ordinances, and synodals provincial,
being then already made, and not repugnant to the law of the land or
the king's prerogative, should still be used and executed. And, as no
such review has yet been perfected, upon this statute now depends the
authority of the canon law in England.

[Footnote x: Burn's eccl. law, pref. viii.]

[Footnote y: Statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 19; revived and confirmed by 1
Eliz. c. 1.]

AS for the canons enacted by the clergy under James I, in the year
1603, and never confirmed in parliament, it has been solemnly adjudged
upon the principles of law and the constitution, that where they are
not merely declaratory of the antient canon law, but are introductory
of new regulations, they do not bind the laity[z]; whatever regard the
clergy may think proper to pay them.

[Footnote z: Stra. 1057.]

THERE are four species of courts in which the civil and canon laws are
permitted under different restrictions to be used. 1. The courts of
the arch-bishops and bishops and their derivative officers, usually
called in our law courts christian, _curiae christianitatis_, or the
ecclesiastical courts. 2. The military courts. 3. The courts of
admiralty. 4. The courts of the two universities. In all, their
reception in general, and the different degrees of that reception, are
grounded intirely upon custom; corroborated in the latter instance by
act of parliament, ratifying those charters which confirm the
customary law of the universities. The more minute consideration of
these will fall properly under that part of these commentaries which
treats of the jurisdiction of courts. It will suffice at present to
remark a few particulars relative to them all, which may serve to
inculcate more strongly the doctrine laid down concerning them[a].

[Footnote a: Hale Hist. c. 2.]

1. AND, first, the courts of common law have the superintendency over
these courts; to keep them within their jurisdictions, to determine
wherein they exceed them, to restrain and prohibit such excess, and
(in case of contumacy) to punish the officer who executes, and in some
cases the judge who enforces, the sentence so declared to be illegal.

2. THE common law has reserved to itself the exposition of all such
acts of parliament, as concern either the extent of these courts or
the matters depending before them. And therefore if these courts
either refuse to allow these acts of parliament, or will expound them
in any other sense than what the common law puts upon them, the king's
courts at Westminster will grant prohibitions to restrain and control
them.

3. AN appeal lies from all these courts to the king, in the last
resort; which proves that the jurisdiction exercised in them is
derived from the crown of England, and not from any foreign potentate,
or intrinsic authority of their own.--And, from these three strong
marks and ensigns of superiority, it appears beyond a doubt that the
civil and canon laws, though admitted in some cases by custom in some
courts, are only subordinate and _leges sub graviori lege_; and that,
thus admitted, restrained, altered, new-modelled, and amended, they
are by no means with us a distinct independent species of laws, but
are inferior branches of the customary or unwritten laws of England,
properly called, the king's ecclesiastical, the king's military, the
king's maritime, or the king's academical, laws.

LET us next proceed to the _leges scriptae_, the written laws of the
kingdom, which are statutes, acts, or edicts, made by the king's
majesty by and with the advice and content of the lords spiritual and
temporal and commons in parliament assembled[b]. The oldest of these
now extant, and printed in our statute books, is the famous _magna
carta_, as confirmed in parliament 9 Hen. III: though doubtless there
were many acts before that time, the records of which are now lost,
and the determinations of them perhaps at present currently received
for the maxims of the old common law.

[Footnote b: 8 Rep. 20.]

THE manner of making these statutes will be better considered
hereafter, when we examine the constitution of parliaments. At present
we will only take notice of the different kinds of statutes; and of
some general rules with regard to their construction[c].

[Footnote c: The method of citing these acts of parliament is various.
Many of our antient statutes are called after the name of the place,
where the parliament was held that made them: as the statutes of
Merton and Marlbridge, of Westminster, Glocester, and Winchester.
Others are denominated entirely from their subject; as the statutes of
Wales and Ireland, the _articuli cleri_, and the _praerogativa regis_.
Some are distinguished by their initial words, a method of citing very
antient; being used by the Jews in denominating the books of the
pentateuch; by the christian church in distinguishing their hymns and
divine offices; by the Romanists in describing their papal bulles; and
in short by the whole body of antient civilians and canonists, among
whom this method of citation generally prevailed, not only with regard
to chapters, but inferior sections also: in imitation of all which we
still call some of our old statutes by their initial words, as the
statute of _quia emptores_, and that of _circumspecte agatis_. But the
most usual method of citing them, especially since the time of Edward
the second, is by naming the year of the king's reign in which the
statute was made, together with the chapter, or particular act,
according to it's numeral order; as, 9 Geo. II. c. 4. For all the acts
of one session of parliament taken together make properly but one
statute; and therefore when two sessions have been held in one year,
we usually mention stat. 1. or 2. Thus the bill of rights is cited, as
1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. signifying that it is the second chapter or
act, of the second statute or the laws made in the second sessions of
parliament, held in the first year of king William and queen Mary.]

FIRST, as to their several kinds. Statutes are either _general_ or
_special_, _public_ or _private_. A general or public act is an
universal rule, that regards the whole community; and of these the
courts of law are bound to take notice judicially and _ex officio_;
without the statute being particularly pleaded, or formally set forth
by the party who claims an advantage under it. Special or private acts
are rather exceptions than rules, being those which only operate upon
particular persons, and private concerns; such as the Romans intitled
_senatus-decreta_, in contradistinction to the _senatus-consulta_,
which regarded the whole community[d]: and of these the judges are not
bound to take notice, unless they be formally shewn and pleaded. Thus,
to shew the distinction, the statute 13 Eliz. c. 10. to prevent
spiritual persons from making leases for longer terms than twenty one
years, or three lives, is a public act; it being a rule prescribed to
the whole body of spiritual persons in the nation: but an act to
enable the bishop of Chester to make a lease to A.B. for sixty years,
is an exception to this rule; it concerns only the parties and the
bishop's successors; and is therefore a private act.

[Footnote d: Gravin. _Orig._ 1. §. 24.]

STATUTES also are either _declaratory_ of the common law, or
_remedial_ of some defects therein. Declaratory, where the old custom
of the kingdom is almost fallen into disuse, or become disputable; in
which case the parliament has thought proper, _in perpetuum rei
testimonium_, and for avoiding all doubts and difficulties, to declare
what the common law is and ever hath been. Thus the statute of
treasons, 25 Edw. III. cap. 2. doth not make any new species of
treasons; but only, for the benefit of the subject, declares and
enumerates those several kinds of offence, which before were treason
at the common law. Remedial statutes are those which are made to
supply such defects, and abridge such superfluities, in the common
law, as arise either from the general imperfection of all human laws,
from change of time and circumstances, from the mistakes and unadvised
determinations of unlearned judges, or from any other cause
whatsoever. And, this being done either by enlarging the common law
where it was too narrow and circumscribed, or by restraining it where
it was too lax and luxuriant, this has occasioned another subordinate
division of remedial acts of parliament into _enlarging_ and
_restraining_ statutes. To instance again in the case of treason.
Clipping the current coin of the kingdom was an offence not
sufficiently guarded against by the common law: therefore it was
thought expedient by statute 5 Eliz. c. 11. to make it high treason,
which it was not at the common law: so that this was an _enlarging_
statute. At common law also spiritual corporations might lease out
their estates for any term of years, till prevented by the statute 13
Eliz. beforementioned: this was therefore a _restraining_ statute.

SECONDLY, the rules to be observed with regard to the construction of
statutes are principally these which follow.

1. THERE are three points to be considered in the construction of all
remedial statutes; the old law, the mischief, and the remedy: that is,
how the common law stood at the making of the act; what the mischief
was, for which the common law did not provide; and what remedy the
parliament hath provided to cure this mischief. And it is the business
of the judges so to construe the act, as to suppress the mischief and
advance the remedy[e]. Let us instance again in the same restraining
statute of the 13 Eliz. By the common law ecclesiastical corporations
might let as long leases as they thought proper: the mischief was,
that they let long and unreasonable leases, to the impoverishment of
their successors: the remedy applied by the statute was by making void
all leases by ecclesiastical bodies for longer terms than three lives
or twenty one years. Now in the construction of this statute it is
held, that leases, though for a longer term, if made by a bishop, are
not void during the bishop's life; or, if made by a dean with
concurrence of his chapter, they are not void during the life of the
dean: for the act was made for the benefit and protection of the
successor[f]. The mischief is therefore sufficiently suppressed by
vacating them after the death of the grantor; but the leases, during
their lives, being not within the mischief, are not within the remedy.

[Footnote e: 3 Rep. 7 _b._ Co. Litt. 11 _b._ 42.]

[Footnote f: Co. Litt. 45. 3 Rep. 60.]

2. A STATUTE, which treats of things or persons of an inferior rank,
cannot by any _general words_ be extended to those of a superior. So a
statute, treating of "deans, prebendaries, parsons, vicars, _and
others having spiritual promotion_," is held not to extend to bishops,
though they have spiritual promotion; deans being the highest persons
named, and bishops being of a still higher order[g].

[Footnote g: 2 Rep. 46.]

3. PENAL statutes must be construed strictly. Thus a statute 1 Edw.
VI. having enacted that those who are convicted of stealing _horses_
should not have the benefit of clergy, the judges conceived that this
did not extend to him that should steal but _one horse_, and therefore
procured a new act for that purpose in the following year[h]. And, to
come nearer our own times, by the statute 14 Geo. II. c. 6. stealing
sheep, _or other cattle_, was made felony without benefit of clergy.
But these general words, "or other cattle," being looked upon as much
too loose to create a capital offence, the act was held to extend to
nothing but mere sheep. And therefore, in the next sessions, it was
found necessary to make another statute, 15 Geo. II. c. 34. extending
the former to bulls, cows, oxen, steers, bullocks, heifers, calves,
and lambs, by name.

[Footnote h: Bac. Elem. c. 12.]

4. STATUTES against frauds are to be liberally and beneficially
expounded. This may seem a contradiction to the last rule; most
statutes against frauds being in their consequences penal. But this
difference is here to be taken: where the statute acts upon the
offender, and inflicts a penalty, as the pillory or a fine, it is then
to be taken strictly: but when the statute acts upon the offence, by
setting aside the fraudulent transaction, here it is to be construed
liberally. Upon this footing the statute of 13 Eliz. c. 5. which
avoids all gifts of goods, &c, made to defraud creditors _and
others_, was held to extend by the general words to a gift made to
defraud the queen of a forfeiture[i].

[Footnote i: 3 Rep. 82.]

5. ONE part of a statute must be so construed by another, that the
whole may if possible stand: _ut res magis valeat, quam pereat_. As if
land be vested in the king and his heirs by act of parliament, saving
the right of A; and A has at that time a lease of it for three years:
here A shall hold it for his term of three years, and afterwards it
shall go to the king. For this interpretation furnishes matter for
every clause of the statute to work and operate upon. But

6. A SAVING, totally repugnant to the body of the act, is void. If
therefore an act of parliament vests land in the king and his heirs,
saving the right of all persons whatsoever; or vests the land of A in
the king, saving the right of A: in either of these cases the saving
is totally repugnant to the body of the statute, and (if good) would
render the statute of no effect or operation; and therefore the saving
is void, and the land vests absolutely in the king[k].

[Footnote k: 1 Rep. 47.]

7. WHERE the common law and a statute differ, the common law gives
place to the statute; and an old statute gives place to a new one. And
this upon the general principle laid down in the last section, that
"_leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant_." But this is to be
understood, only when the latter statute is couched in negative terms,
or by it's matter necessarily implies a negative. As if a former act
says, that a juror upon such a trial shall have twenty pounds a year;
and a new statute comes and says, he shall have twenty marks: here the
latter statute, though it does not express, yet necessarily implies a
negative, and virtually repeals the former. For if twenty marks be
made qualification sufficient, the former statute which requires
twenty pounds is at an end[l]. But if both acts be merely affirmative,
and the substance such that both may stand together, here the latter
does not repeal the former, but they shall both have a concurrent
efficacy. If by a former law an offence be indictable at the quarter
sessions, and a latter law makes the same offence indictable at the
assises; here the jurisdiction of the sessions is not taken away, but
both have a concurrent jurisdiction, and the offender may be
prosecuted at either; unless the new statute subjoins express negative
words, as, that the offence shall be indictable at the assises, _and
not elsewhere_[m].

[Footnote l: Jenk. Cent. 2. 73.]

[Footnote m: 11 Rep. 63.]

8. IF a statute, that repeals another, is itself repealed afterwards,
the first statute is hereby revived, without any formal words for that
purpose. So when the statutes of 26 and 35 Hen. VIII, declaring the
king to be the supreme head of the church, were repealed by a statute
1 & 2 Ph. and Mary, and this latter statute was afterwards repealed by
an act of 1 Eliz. there needed not any express words of revival in
queen Elizabeth's statute, but these acts of king Henry were impliedly
and virtually revived[n].

[Footnote n: 4 Inst. 325.]

9. ACTS of parliament derogatory from the power of subsequent
parliaments bind not. So the statute 11 Hen. VII. c. 1. which directs,
that no person for assisting a king _de facto_ shall be attainted of
treason by act of parliament or otherwise, is held to be good only as
to common prosecutions for high treason; but will not restrain or clog
any parliamentary attainder[o]. Because the legislature, being in
truth the sovereign power, is always of equal, always of absolute
authority: it acknowleges no superior upon earth, which the prior
legislature must have been, if it's ordinances could bind the present
parliament. And upon the same principle Cicero, in his letters to
Atticus, treats with a proper contempt these restraining clauses which
endeavour to tie up the hands of succeeding legislatures. "When you
repeal the law itself, says he, you at the same time repeal the
prohibitory clause, which guards against such repeal[p]."

[Footnote o: 4 Inst. 43.]

[Footnote p: _Cum lex abrogatur, illud ipsum abrogatur, quo non eam
abrogari oporteat._ _l._ 3. _ep._ 23.]

10. LASTLY, acts of parliament that are impossible to be performed are
of no validity; and if there arise out of them collaterally any absurd
consequences, manifestly contradictory to common reason, they are,
with regard to those collateral consequences, void. I lay down the
rule with these restrictions; though I know it is generally laid down
more largely, that acts of parliament contrary to reason are void. But
if the parliament will positively enact a thing to be done which is
unreasonable, I know of no power that can control it: and the examples
usually alleged in support of this sense of the rule do none of them
prove, that where the main object of a statute is unreasonable the
judges are at liberty to reject it; for that were to set the judicial
power above that of the legislature, which would be subversive of all
government. But where some collateral matter arises out of the general
words, and happens to be unreasonable; there the judges are in decency
to conclude that this consequence was not foreseen by the parliament,
and therefore they are at liberty to expound the statute by equity,
and only _quoad hoc_ disregard it. Thus if an act of parliament gives
a man power to try all causes, that arise within his manor of Dale;
yet, if a cause should arise in which he himself is party, the act is
construed not to extend to that; because it is unreasonable that any
man should determine his own quarrel[q]. But, if we could conceive it
possible for the parliament to enact, that he should try as well his
own causes as those of other persons, there is no court that has power
to defeat the intent of the legislature, when couched in such evident
and express words, as leave no doubt whether it was the intent of the
legislature or no.

[Footnote q: 8 Rep. 118.]

THESE are the several grounds of the laws of England: over and above
which, equity is also frequently called in to assist, to moderate,
and to explain it. What equity is, and how impossible in it's very
essence to be reduced to stated rules, hath been shewn in the
preceding section. I shall therefore only add, that there are courts
of this kind established for the benefit of the subject, to correct
and soften the rigor of the law, when through it's generality it bears
too hard in particular cases; to detect and punish latent frauds,
which the law is not minute enough to reach; to enforce the execution
of such matters of trust and confidence, as are binding in conscience,
though perhaps not strictly legal; to deliver from such dangers as are
owing to misfortune or oversight; and, in short, to relieve in all
such cases as are, _bona fide_, objects of relief. This is the
business of our courts of equity, which however are only conversant in
matters of property. For the freedom of our constitution will not
permit, that in criminal cases a power should be lodged in any judge,
to construe the law otherwise than according to the letter. This
caution, while it admirably protects the public liberty, can never
bear hard upon individuals. A man cannot suffer _more_ punishment than
the law assigns, but he may suffer _less_. The laws cannot be strained
by partiality to inflict a penalty beyond what the letter will
warrant; but in cases where the letter induces any apparent hardship,
the crown has the power to pardon.




SECTION THE FOURTH.

OF THE COUNTRIES SUBJECT TO THE LAWS OF ENGLAND.


THE kingdom of England, over which our municipal laws have
jurisdiction, includes not, by the common law, either Wales, Scotland,
or Ireland, or any other part of the king's dominions, except the
territory of England only. And yet the civil laws and local customs of
this territory do now obtain, in part or in all, with more or less
restrictions, in these and many other adjacent countries; of which it
will be proper first to take a review, before we consider the kingdom
of England itself, the original and proper subject of these laws.

WALES had continued independent of England, unconquered and
uncultivated, in the primitive pastoral state which Caesar and Tacitus
ascribe to Britain in general, for many centuries; even from the time
of the hostile invasions of the Saxons, when the ancient and christian
inhabitants of the island retired to those natural intrenchments, for
protection from their pagan visitants. But when these invaders
themselves were converted to christianity, and settled into regular
and potent governments, this retreat of the antient Britons grew every
day narrower; they were overrun by little and little, gradually driven
from one fastness to another, and by repeated losses abridged of their
wild independence. Very early in our history we find their princes
doing homage to the crown of England; till at length in the reign of
Edward the first, who may justly be stiled the conqueror of Wales, the
line of their antient princes was abolished, and the king of
England's eldest son became, as a matter of course, their titular
prince: the territory of Wales being then entirely annexed to the
dominion of the crown of England[a], or, as the statute of Rutland[b]
expresses it, "_terra Walliae cum incolis suis, prius regi jure
feodali subjecta_, (of which homage was the sign) _jam in proprietatis
dominium totaliter et cum integritate conversa est, et coronae regni
Angliae tanquam pars corporis ejusdem annexa et unita_." By the
statute also of Wales[c] very material alterations were made in divers
parts of their laws, so as to reduce them nearer to the English
standard, especially in the forms of their judicial proceedings: but
they still retained very much of their original polity, particularly
their rule of inheritance, viz. that their lands were divided equally
among all the issue male, and did not descend to the eldest son alone.
By other subsequent statutes their provincial immunities were still
farther abridged: but the finishing stroke to their independency, was
given by the statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 26. which at the same time gave
the utmost advancement to their civil prosperity, by admitting them to
a thorough communication of laws with the subjects of England. Thus
were this brave people gradually conquered into the enjoyment of true
liberty; being insensibly put upon the same footing, and made
fellow-citizens with their conquerors. A generous method of triumph,
which the republic of Rome practised with great success; till she
reduced all Italy to her obedience, by admitting the vanquished states
to partake of the Roman privileges.

[Footnote a: Vaugh. 400.]

[Footnote b: 10 Edw. I.]

[Footnote c: 12 Edw. I.]

IT is enacted by this statute 27 Hen. VIII, 1. That the dominion of
Wales shall be for ever united to the kingdom of England. 2. That all
Welchmen born shall have the same liberties as other the king's
subjects. 3. That lands in Wales shall be inheritable according to the
English tenures and rules of descent. 4. That the laws of England, and
no other, shall be used in Wales: besides many other regulations of
the police of this principality. And the statute 34 & 35 Hen. VIII.
c. 26. confirms the same, adds farther regulations, divides it into
twelve shires, and, in short, reduces it into the same order in which
it stands at this day; differing from the kingdom of England in only a
few particulars, and those too of the nature of privileges, (such as
having courts within itself, independent of the process of Westminster
hall) and some other immaterial peculiarities, hardly more than are to
be found in many counties of England itself.

THE kingdom of Scotland, notwithstanding the union of the crowns on
the accession of their king James VI to that of England, continued an
entirely separate and distinct kingdom for above a century, though an
union had been long projected; which was judged to be the more easy to
be done, as both kingdoms were antiently under the same government,
and still retained a very great resemblance, though far from an
identity, in their laws. By an act of parliament 1 Jac. I. c. 1. it is
declared, that these two, mighty, famous, and antient kingdoms were
formerly one. And sir Edward Coke observes[d], how marvellous a
conformity there was, not only in the religion and language of the two
nations, but also in their antient laws, the descent of the crown,
their parliaments, their titles of nobility, their officers of state
and of justice, their writs, their customs, and even the language of
their laws. Upon which account he supposes the common law of each to
have been originally the same, especially as their most antient and
authentic book, called _regiam majestatem_ and containing the rules of
_their_ antient common law, is extremely similar that of Glanvil,
which contains the principles of _ours_, as it stood in the reign of
Henry II. And the many diversities, subsisting between the two laws at
present, may be well enough accounted for, from a diversity of
practice in two large and uncommunicating jurisdictions, and from the
acts of two distinct and independent parliaments, which have in many
points altered and abrogated the old common law of both kingdoms.

[Footnote d: 4 Inst. 345.]

HOWEVER sir Edward Coke, and the politicians of that time, conceived
great difficulties in carrying on the projected union: but these were
at length overcome, and the great work was happily effected in 1707, 5
Anne; when twenty five articles of union were agreed to by the
parliaments of both nations: the purport of the most considerable
being as follows:

1. THAT on the first of May 1707, and for ever after, the kingdoms of
England and Scotland, shall be united into one kingdom, by the name of
Great Britain.

2. THE succession to the monarchy of Great Britain shall be the same
as was before settled with regard to that of England.

3. THE united kingdom shall be represented by one parliament.

4. THERE shall be a communication of all rights and privileges between
the subjects of both kingdoms, except where it is otherwise agreed.

9. WHEN England raises 2,000,000_l._ by a land tax, Scotland shall
raise 48,000_l._

16, 17. THE standards of the coin, of weights, and of measures, shall
be reduced to those of England, throughout the united kingdoms.

18. THE laws relating to trade, customs, and the excise, shall be the
same in Scotland as in England. But all the other laws of Scotland
shall remain in force; but alterable by the parliament of Great
Britain. Yet with this caution; that laws relating to public policy
are alterable at the discretion of the parliament; laws relating to
private rights are not to be altered but for the evident utility of
the people of Scotland.

22. SIXTEEN peers are to be chosen to represent the peerage of
Scotland in parliament, and forty five members to sit in the house of
commons.

23. THE sixteen peers of Scotland shall have all privileges of
parliament: and all peers of Scotland shall be peers of Great Britain,
and rank next after those of the same degree at the time of the union,
and shall have all privileges of peers, except sitting in the house of
lords and voting on the trial of a peer.

THESE are the principal of the twenty five articles of union, which
are ratified and confirmed by statute 5 Ann. c. 8. in which statute
there are also two acts of parliament recited; the one of Scotland,
whereby the church of Scotland, and also the four universities of that
kingdom, are established for ever, and all succeeding sovereigns are
to take an oath inviolably to maintain the same; the other of England,
5 Ann. c. 6. whereby the acts of uniformity of 13 Eliz. and 13 Car.
II. (except as the same had been altered by parliament at that time)
and all other acts then in force for the preservation of the church of
England, are declared perpetual; and it is stipulated, that every
subsequent king and queen shall take an oath inviolably to maintain
the same within England, Ireland, Wales, and the town of Berwick upon
Tweed. And it is enacted, that these two acts "shall for ever be
observed as fundamental and essential conditions of the union."

UPON these articles, and act of union, it is to be observed, 1. That
the two kingdoms are now so inseparably united, that nothing can ever
disunite them again, but an infringement of those points which, when
they were separate and independent nations, it was mutually stipulated
should be "fundamental and essential conditions of the union." 2. That
whatever else may be deemed "fundamental and essential conditions,"
the preservation of the two churches, of England and Scotland, in the
same state that they were in at the time of the union, and the
maintenance of the acts of uniformity which establish our common
prayer, are expressly declared so to be. 3. That therefore any
alteration in the constitutions of either of those churches, or in the
liturgy of the church of England, would be an infringement of these
"fundamental and essential conditions," and greatly endanger the
union. 4. That the municipal laws of Scotland are ordained to be still
observed in that part of the island, unless altered by parliament;
and, as the parliament has not yet thought proper, except in a few
instances, to alter them, they still (with regard to the particulars
unaltered) continue in full force. Wherefore the municipal or common
laws of England are, generally speaking, of no force or validity in
Scotland; and, of consequence, in the ensuing commentaries, we shall
have very little occasion to mention, any farther than sometimes by
way of illustration, the municipal laws of that part of the united
kingdoms.

THE town of Berwick upon Tweed, though subject to the crown of England
ever since the conquest of it in the reign of Edward IV, is not part
of the kingdom of England, nor subject to the common law; though it is
subject to all acts of parliament, being represented by burgesses
therein. And therefore it was declared by statute 20 Geo. II. c. 42.
that where England only is mentioned in any act of parliament, the
same notwithstanding shall be deemed to comprehend the dominion of
Wales, and town of Berwick upon Tweed. But the general law there used
is the Scots law, and the ordinary process of the courts of
Westminster-hall is there of no authority[e].

[Footnote e: 1 Sid. 382. 2 Show. 365.]

AS to Ireland, that is still a distinct kingdom; though a dependent,
subordinate kingdom. It was only entitled the dominion or lordship of
Ireland[f], and the king's stile was no other than _dominus
Hiberniae_, lord of Ireland, till the thirty third year of king Henry
the eighth; when he assumed the title of king, which is recognized by
act of parliament 35 Hen. VIII. c. 3. But, as Scotland and England are
now one and the same kingdom, and yet differ in their municipal laws;
so England and Ireland are, on the other hand, distinct kingdoms, and
yet in general agree in their laws. The inhabitants of Ireland are,
for the most part, descended from the English, who planted it as a
kind of colony, after the conquest of it by king Henry the second, at
which time they carried over the English laws along with them. And as
Ireland, thus conquered, planted, and governed, still continues in a
state of dependence, it must necessarily conform to, and be obliged by
such laws as the superior state thinks proper to prescribe.

[Footnote f: _Stat. Hiberniae._ 14 Hen. III.]

AT the time of this conquest the Irish were governed by what they
called the Brehon law, so stiled from the Irish name of judges, who
were denominated Brehons[g]. But king John in the twelfth year of his
reign went into Ireland, and carried over with him many able sages of
the law; and there by his letters patent, in right of the dominion of
conquest, is said to have ordained and established that Ireland should
be governed by the laws of England[h]: which letters patent sir Edward
Coke[i] apprehends to have been there confirmed in parliament. But to
this ordinance many of the Irish were averse to conform, and still
stuck to their Brehon law: so that both Henry the third[k] and Edward
the first[l] were obliged to renew the injunction; and at length in a
parliament holden at Kilkenny, 40 Edw. III, under Lionel duke of
Clarence, the then lieutenant of Ireland, the Brehon law was formally
abolished, it being unanimously declared to be indeed no law, but a
lewd custom crept in of later times. And yet, even in the reign of
queen Elizabeth, the wild natives still kept and preserved their
Brehon law; which is described[m] to have been "a rule of right
unwritten, but delivered by tradition from one to another, in which
oftentimes there appeared great shew of equity in determining the
right between party and party, but in many things repugnant quite
both to God's law and man's." The latter part of which character is
alone allowed it under Edward the first and his grandson.

[Footnote g: 4 Inst. 358. Edm. Spenser's state of Ireland. p. 1513.
edit. Hughes.]

[Footnote h: Vaugh. 294. 2 Pryn. Rec. 85.]

[Footnote i: 1 Inst. 341.]

[Footnote k: _A.R._ 30. 1 Rym. _Foed._ 442.]

[Footnote l: _A.R._ 5.--_pro eo quod leges quibus utuntur Hybernici
Deo detestabiles existunt, et omni juri dissonant, adeo quod leges
censeri non debeant--nobis et consilio nostro satis videtur expediens
eisdem utendas concedere leges Anglicanas._ 3 Pryn. Rec. 1218.]

[Footnote m: Edm. Spenser. _ibid._]

BUT as Ireland was a distinct dominion, and had parliaments of it's
own, it is to be observed, that though the immemorial customs, or
common law, of England were made the rule of justice in Ireland also,
yet no acts of the English parliament, since the twelfth of king John,
extended into that kingdom; unless it were specially named, or
included under general words, such as, "within any of the king's
dominions." And this is particularly expressed, and the reason given
in the year book[n]: "Ireland hath a parliament of it's own, and
maketh and altereth laws; and our statutes do not bind them, because
they do not send representatives to our parliament: but their persons
are the king's subjects, like as the inhabitants of Calais, Gascoigny,
and Guienne, while they continued under the king's subjection." The
method made use of in Ireland, as stated by sir Edward Coke[o], of
making statutes in their parliaments, according to Poynings' law, of
which hereafter, is this: 1. The lord lieutenant and council of
Ireland must certify to the king under the great seal of Ireland the
acts proposed to be passed. 2. The king and council of England are to
consider, approve, alter, or reject the said acts; and certify them
back again under the great seal of England. And then, 3. They are to
be proposed, received, or rejected in the parliament of Ireland. By
this means nothing was left to the parliament in Ireland, but a bare
negative or power of rejecting, not of proposing, any law. But the
usage now is, that bills are often framed in either house of
parliament under the denomination of heads for a bill or bills; and in
that shape they are offered to the consideration of the lord
lieutenant and privy council, who then reject them at pleasure,
without transmitting them to England.

[Footnote n: 2 Ric. III. pl. 12.]

[Footnote o: 4 Inst. 353.]

BUT the Irish nation, being excluded from the benefit of the English
statutes, were deprived of many good and profitable laws, made for
the improvement of the common law: and, the measure of justice in both
kingdoms becoming thereby no longer uniform, therefore in the 10 Hen.
VII. a set of statutes passed in Ireland, (sir Edward Poynings being
then lord deputy, whence it is called Poynings' law) by which it was,
among other things, enacted, that all acts of parliament before made
in England, should be of force within the realm of Ireland[p]. But, by
the same rule that no laws made in England, between king John's time
and Poynings' law, were then binding in Ireland, it follows that no
acts of the English parliament made since the 10 Hen. VII. do now bind
the people of Ireland, unless specially named or included under
general words[q]. And on the other hand it is equally clear, that
where Ireland is particularly named, or is included under general
words, they are bound by such acts of parliament. For this follows
from the very nature and constitution of a dependent state: dependence
being very little else, but an obligation to conform to the will or
law of that superior person or state, upon which the inferior depends.
The original and true ground of this superiority is the right of
conquest: a right allowed by the law of nations, if not by that of
nature; and founded upon a compact either expressly or tacitly made
between the conqueror and the conquered, that if they will acknowlege
the victor for their master, he will treat them for the future as
subjects, and not as enemies[r].

[Footnote p: 4 Inst. 351.]

[Footnote q: 12 Rep. 112.]

[Footnote r: Puff. L. of N. 8. 6. 24.]

BUT this state of dependence being almost forgotten, and ready to be
disputed by the Irish nation, it became necessary some years ago to
declare how that matter really stood: and therefore by statute 6 Geo.
I. c. 5. it is declared, that the kingdom of Ireland ought to be
subordinate to, and dependent upon, the imperial crown of Great
Britain, as being inseparably united thereto; and that the king's
majesty, with the consent of the lords and commons of Great Britain in
parliament, hath power to make laws to bind the people of Ireland.

THUS we see how extensively the laws of Ireland communicate with those
of England: and indeed such communication is highly necessary, as the
ultimate resort from the courts of justice in Ireland is, as in Wales,
to those in England; a writ of error (in the nature of an appeal)
lying from the king's bench in Ireland to the king's bench in
England[s], as the appeal from all other courts in Ireland lies
immediately to the house of lords here: it being expressly declared,
by the same statute 6 Geo. I. c. 5. that the peers of Ireland have no
jurisdiction to affirm or reverse any judgments or decrees whatsoever.
The propriety, and even necessity, in all inferior dominions, of this
constitution, "that, though justice be in general administred by
courts of their own, yet that the appeal in the last resort ought to
be to the courts of the superior state," is founded upon these two
reasons. 1. Because otherwise the law, appointed or permitted to such
inferior dominion, might be insensibly changed within itself, without
the assent of the superior. 2. Because otherwise judgments might be
given to the disadvantage or diminution of the superiority; or to make
the dependence to be only of the person of the king, and not of the
crown of England[t].

[Footnote s: This was law in the time of Hen. VIII. as appears by the
antient book, entituled, _diversity of courts, c. bank le roy_.]

[Footnote t: Vaugh. 402.]

WITH regard to the other adjacent islands which are subject to the
crown of Great Britain, some of them (as the isle of Wight, of
Portland, of Thanet, &c.) are comprized within some neighbouring
county, and are therefore to be looked upon as annexed to the mother
island, and part of the kingdom of England. But there are others,
which require a more particular consideration.

AND, first, the isle of Man is a distinct territory from England and
is not governed by our laws; neither doth any act of parliament extend
to it, unless it be particularly named therein; and then an act of
parliament is binding there[u]. It was formerly a subordinate
feudatory kingdom, subject to the kings of Norway; then to king John
and Henry III of England; afterwards to the kings of Scotland; and
then again to the crown of England: and at length we find king Henry
IV claiming the island by right of conquest, and disposing of it to
the earl of Northumberland; upon whose attainder it was granted (by
the name of the lordship of Man) to sir John de Stanley by letters
patent 7 Hen. IV[w]. In his lineal descendants it continued for eight
generations, till the death of Ferdinando earl of Derby, _A.D._ 1594;
when a controversy arose concerning the inheritance thereof, between
his daughters and William his surviving brother: upon which, and a
doubt that was started concerning the validity of the original
patent[x], the island was seised into the queen's hands, and
afterwards various grants were made of it by king James the first; all
which being expired or surrendered, it was granted afresh in 7 Jac. I.
to William earl of Derby, and the heirs male of his body, with
remainder to his heirs general; which grant was the next year
confirmed by act of parliament, with a restraint of the power of
alienation by the said earl and his issue male. On the death of James
earl of Derby, _A.D._ 1735, the male line of earl William failing, the
duke of Atholl succeeded to the island as heir general by a female
branch. In the mean time, though the title of king had long been
disused, the earls of Derby, as lords of Man, had maintained a sort of
royal authority therein; by assenting or dissenting to laws, and
exercising an appellate jurisdiction. Yet, though no English writ, or
process from the courts of Westminster, was of any authority in Man,
an appeal lay from a decree of the lord of the island to the king of
Great Britain in council[y]. But, the distinct jurisdiction of this
little subordinate royalty being found inconvenient for the purposes
of public justice, and for the revenue, (it affording a convenient
asylum for debtors, outlaws, and smugglers) authority was given to the
treasury by statute 12 Geo. I. c. 28. to purchase the interest of the
then proprietors for the use of the crown: which purchase hath at
length been completed in this present year 1765, and confirmed by
statutes 5 Geo. III. c. 26, & 39. whereby the whole island and all
it's dependencies, so granted as aforesaid, (except the landed
property of the Atholl family, their manerial rights and emoluments,
and the patronage of the bishoprick[z] and other ecclesiastical
benefices) are unalienably vested in the crown, and subjected to the
regulations of the British excise and customs.

[Footnote u: 4 Inst. 284. 2 And. 116.]

[Footnote w: Selden. tit. hon. 1. 3.]

[Footnote x: Camden. Eliz. _A.D._ 1594.]

[Footnote y: 1 P.W. 329.]

[Footnote z: The bishoprick of Man, or Sodor, or Sodor and Man, was
formerly within the province of Canterbury, but annexed to that of
York by statute 33 Hen. VIII. c. 31.]

THE islands of Jersey, Guernsey, Sark, Alderney, and their appendages,
were parcel of the duchy of Normandy, and were united to the crown of
England by the first princes of the Norman line. They are governed by
their own laws, which are for the most part the ducal customs of
Normandy, being collected in an antient book of very great authority,
entituled, _le grand coustumier_. The king's writ, or process from the
courts of Westminster, is there of no force; but his commission is.
They are not bound by common acts of our parliaments, unless
particularly named[a]. All causes are originally determined by their
own officers, the bailiffs and jurats of the islands; but an appeal
lies from them to the king in council, in the last resort.

[Footnote a: 4 Inst. 286.]

BESIDES these adjacent islands, our more distant plantations in
America, and elsewhere, are also in some respects subject to the
English laws. Plantations, or colonies in distant countries, are
either such where the lands are claimed by right of occupancy only, by
finding them desart and uncultivated, and peopling them from the
mother country; or where, when already cultivated, they have been
either gained by conquest, or ceded to us by treaties. And both these
rights are founded upon the law of nature, or at least upon that of
nations. But there is a difference between these two species of
colonies, with respect to the laws by which they are bound. For it is
held[b], that if an uninhabited country be discovered and planted by
English subjects, all the English laws are immediately there in
force. For as the law is the birthright of every subject, so wherever
they go they carry their laws with them[c]. But in conquered or ceded
countries, that have already laws of their own, the king may indeed
alter and change those laws; but, till he does actually change them,
the antient laws of the country remain, unless such as are against the
law of God, as in the case of an infidel country[d].

[Footnote b: Salk. 411. 666.]

[Footnote c: 2 P. Wms. 75.]

[Footnote d: 7 Rep. 17 _b._ Calvin's case. Show. Parl. C. 31.]

OUR American plantations are principally of this latter sort, being
obtained in the last century either by right of conquest and driving
out the natives (with what natural justice I shall not at present
enquire) or by treaties. And therefore the common law of England, as
such, has no allowance or authority there; they being no part of the
mother country, but distinct (though dependent) dominions. They are
subject however to the control of the parliament; though (like
Ireland, Man, and the rest) not bound by any acts of parliament,
unless particularly named. The form of government in most of them is
borrowed from that of England. They have a governor named by the king,
(or in some proprietary colonies by the proprietor) who is his
representative or deputy. They have courts of justice of their own,
from whose decisions an appeal lies to the king in council here in
England. Their general assemblies which are their house of commons,
together with their council of state being their upper house, with the
concurrence of the king or his representative the governor, make laws
suited to their own emergencies. But it is particularly declared by
statute 7 & 8 W. III. c. 22. That all laws, by-laws, usages, and
customs, which shall be in practice in any of the plantations,
repugnant to any law, made or to be made in this kingdom relative to
the said plantations, shall be utterly void and of none effect.

THESE are the several parts of the dominions of the crown of Great
Britain, in which the municipal laws of England are not of force or
authority, merely _as_ the municipal laws of England. Most of them
have probably copied the spirit of their own law from this original;
but then it receives it's obligation, and authoritative force, from
being the law of the country.

AS to any foreign dominions which may belong to the person of the king
by hereditary descent, by purchase, or other acquisition, as the
territory of Hanover, and his majesty's other property in Germany; as
these do not in any wise appertain to the crown of these kingdoms,
they are entirely unconnected with the laws of England, and do not
communicate with this nation in any respect whatsoever. The English
legislature had wisely remarked the inconveniences that had formerly
resulted from dominions on the continent of Europe; from the Norman
territory which William the conqueror brought with him, and held in
conjunction with the English throne; and from Anjou, and it's
appendages, which fell to Henry the second by hereditary descent. They
had seen the nation engaged for near four hundred years together in
ruinous wars for defence of these foreign dominions; till, happily for
this country, they were lost under the reign of Henry the sixth. They
observed that from that time the maritime interests of England were
better understood and more closely pursued: that, in consequence of
this attention, the nation, as soon as she had rested from her civil
wars, began at this period to flourish all at once; and became much
more considerable in Europe than when her princes were possessed of a
larger territory, and her counsels distracted by foreign interests.
This experience and these considerations gave birth to a conditional
clause in the act[e] of settlement, which vested the crown in his
present majesty's illustrious house, "That in case the crown and
imperial dignity of this realm shall hereafter come to any person not
being a native of this kingdom of England, this nation shall not be
obliged to engage in any war for the defence of any dominions or
territories which do not belong to the crown of England, without
consent of parliament."

[Footnote e: Stat. 12 & 13 W. III. c. 3.]

WE come now to consider the kingdom of England in particular, the
direct and immediate subject of those laws, concerning which we are to
treat in the ensuing commentaries. And this comprehends not only
Wales, of which enough has been already said, but also part of the
sea. The main or high seas are part of the realm of England, for
thereon our courts of admiralty have jurisdiction, as will be shewn
hereafter; but they are not subject to the common law[f]. This main
sea begins at the low-water-mark. But between the high-water-mark, and
the low-water-mark, where the sea ebbs and flows, the common law and
the admiralty have _divisum imperium_, an alternate jurisdiction; one
upon the water, when it is full sea; the other upon the land, when it
is an ebb[g].

[Footnote f: Co. Litt. 260.]

[Footnote g: Finch. L. 78.]

THE territory of England is liable to two divisions; the one
ecclesiastical, the other civil.

1. THE ecclesiastical division is, primarily, into two provinces,
those of Canterbury and York. A province is the circuit of an
arch-bishop's jurisdiction. Each province contains divers dioceses, or
sees of suffragan bishops; whereof Canterbury includes twenty one, and
York three; besides the bishoprick of the isle of Man, which was
annexed to the province of York by king Henry VIII. Every diocese is
divided into archdeaconries, whereof there are sixty in all; each
archdeaconry into rural deanries, which are the circuit of the
archdeacon's and rural dean's jurisdiction, of whom hereafter; and
every deanry is divided into parishes[h].

[Footnote h: Co. Litt. 94.]

A PARISH is that circuit of ground in which the souls under the care
of one parson or vicar do inhabit. These are computed to be near ten
thousand in number. How antient the division of parishes is, may at
present be difficult to ascertain; for it seems to be agreed on all
hands, that in the early ages of christianity in this island, parishes
were unknown, or at least signified the same that a diocese does now.
There was then no appropriation of ecclesiastical dues to any
particular church; but every man was at liberty to contribute his
tithes to whatever priest or church he pleased, provided only that he
did it to some: or, if he made no special appointment or appropriation
thereof, they were paid into the hands of the bishop, whose duty it
was to distribute them among the clergy and for other pious purposes
according to his own discretion[i].

[Footnote i: Seld. of tith. 9. 4. 2 Inst. 646. Hob. 296.]

MR Camden[k] says England was divided into parishes by arch-bishop
Honorius about the year 630. Sir Henry Hobart[l] lays it down that
parishes were first erected by the council of Lateran, which was held
_A.D._ 1179. Each widely differing from the other, and both of them
perhaps from the truth; which will probably be found in the medium
between the two extremes. For Mr Selden has clearly shewn[m], that the
clergy lived in common without any division of parishes, long after
the time mentioned by Camden. And it appears from the Saxon laws, that
parishes were in being long before the date of that council of
Lateran, to which they are ascribed by Hobart.

[Footnote k: in his Britannia.]

[Footnote l: Hob. 296.]

[Footnote m: of tithes. c. 9.]

WE find the distinction of parishes, nay even of mother-churches, so
early as in the laws of king Edgar, about the year 970. Before that
time the consecration of tithes was in general _arbitrary_; that is,
every man paid his own (as was before observed) to what church or
parish he pleased. But this being liable to be attended with either
fraud, or at least caprice, in the persons paying; and with either
jealousies or mean compliances in such as were competitors for
receiving them; it was now ordered by the law of king Edgar[n], that
"_dentur omnes decimae primariae ecclesiae ad quam parochia
pertinet_." However, if any thane, or great lord, had a church within
his own demesnes, distinct from the mother-church, in the nature of a
private chapel; then, provided such church had a coemitery or
consecrated place of burial belonging to it, he might allot one third
of his tithes for the maintenance of the officiating minister: but, if
it had no coemitery, the thane must himself have maintained his
chaplain by some other means; for in such case _all_ his tithes were
ordained to be paid to the _primariae ecclesiae_ or mother-church[o].

[Footnote n: _c._ 1.]

[Footnote o: _Ibid._ _c._ 2. See also the laws of king Canute, c. 11.
about the year 1030.]

THIS proves that the kingdom was then universally divided into
parishes; which division happened probably not all at once, but by
degrees. For it seems pretty clear and certain that the boundaries of
parishes were originally ascertained by those of a manor or manors:
since it very seldom happens that a manor extends itself over more
parishes than one, though there are often many manors in one parish.
The lords, as christianity spread itself, began to build churches upon
their own demesnes or wastes, to accommodate their tenants in one or
two adjoining lordships; and, in order to have divine service
regularly performed therein, obliged all their tenants to appropriate
their tithes to the maintenance of the one officiating minister,
instead of leaving them at liberty to distribute them among the clergy
of the diocese in general: and this tract of land, the tithes whereof
were so appropriated, formed a distinct parish. Which will well enough
account for the frequent intermixture of parishes one with another.
For if a lord had a parcel of land detached from the main of his
estate, but not sufficient to form a parish of itself, it was natural
for him to endow his newly erected church with the tithes of those
disjointed lands; especially if no church was then built in any
lordship adjoining to those out-lying parcels.

THUS parishes were gradually formed, and parish churches endowed with
the tithes that arose within the circuit assigned. But some lands,
either because they were in the hands of irreligious and careless
owners, or were situate in forests and desart places, or for other
now unsearchable reasons, were never united to any parish, and
therefore continue to this day extraparochial; and their tithes are
now by immemorial custom payable to the king instead of the bishop, in
trust and confidence that he will distribute them, for the general
good of the church[p]. And thus much for the ecclesiastical division
of this kingdom.

[Footnote p: 2 Inst. 647. 2 Rep. 44. Cro. Eliz. 512.]

2. THE civil division of the territory of England is into counties, of
those counties into hundreds, of those hundreds into tithings or
towns. Which division, as it now stands, seems to owe it's original to
king Alfred; who, to prevent the rapines and disorders which formerly
prevailed in the realm, instituted tithings; so called, from the
Saxon, because _ten_ freeholders with their families composed one.
These all dwelt together, and were sureties or free pledges to the
king for the good behaviour of each other; and, if any offence were
committed in their district, they were bound to have the offender
forthcoming[q]. And therefore antiently no man was suffered to abide
in England above forty days, unless he were enrolled in some tithing
or decennary[r]. One of the principal inhabitants of the tithing is
annually appointed to preside over the rest, being called the
tithing-man, the headborough, (words which speak their own etymology)
and in some countries the borsholder, or borough's-ealder, being
supposed the discreetest man in the borough, town, or tithing[s].

[Footnote q: _Flet._ 1. 47. This the laws of king Edward the
confessor, c. 20. very justly intitle "_summa et maxima securitas, per
quam omnes statu firmissimo sustinentur;--quae hoc modo fiebat, quod
sub decennali fidejussione debebant esse universi, &c._"]

[Footnote r: Mirr. c. 1. §. 3.]

[Footnote s: Finch. L. 8.]

TITHINGS, towns, or vills, are of the same signification in law; and
had, each of them, originally a church and celebration of divine
service, sacraments, and burials; which to have, or have had, separate
to itself, is the essential distinction of a town, according to sir
Edward Coke[t]. The word _town_ or _vill_ is indeed, by the alteration
of times and language, now become a generical term, comprehending
under it the several species of cities, boroughs, and common towns. A
city is a town incorporated, which is or hath been the see of a
bishop; and though the bishoprick be dissolved, as at Westminster, yet
still it remaineth a city[u]. A borough is now understood to be a
town, either corporate or not, that sendeth burgesses to
parliament[w]. Other towns there are, to the number sir Edward Coke
says[x] of 8803, which are neither cities nor boroughs; some of which
have the privileges of markets, and others not; but both are equally
towns in law. To several of these towns there are small appendages
belonging, called hamlets; which are taken notice of in the statute of
Exeter[y], which makes frequent mention of entire vills, demi-vills,
and hamlets. Entire vills sir Henry Spelman[z] conjectures to have
consisted of ten freemen, or frank-pledges, demi-vills of five, and
hamlets of less than five. These little collections of houses are
sometimes under the same administration as the town itself, sometimes
governed by separate officers; in which last case it is, to some
purposes in law, looked upon as a distinct township. These towns, as
was before hinted, contained each originally but one parish, and one
tithing; though many of them now, by the encrease of inhabitants, are
divided into several parishes and tithings: and sometimes, where there
is but one parish there are two or more vills or tithings.

[Footnote t: 1 Inst. 115 _b._]

[Footnote u: Co. Litt. 109 _b._]

[Footnote w: Litt. §. 164.]

[Footnote x: 1 Inst. 116.]

[Footnote y: 14 Edw. I.]

[Footnote z: Gloss. 274.]

AS ten families of freeholders made up a town or tithing, so ten
tithings composed a superior division, called a hundred, as consisting
of ten times ten families. The hundred is governed by an high
constable or bailiff, and formerly there was regularly held in it the
hundred court for the trial of causes, though now fallen into disuse.
In some of the more northern counties these hundreds are called
wapentakes[a].

[Footnote a: Seld. _in Fortesc._ _c._ 24.]

THE subdivision of hundreds into tithings seems to be most peculiarly
the invention of Alfred: the institution of hundreds themselves he
rather introduced than invented. For they seem to have obtained in
Denmark[b]: and we find that in France a regulation of this sort was
made above two hundred years before; set on foot by Clotharius and
Childebert, with a view of obliging each district to answer for the
robberies committed in it's own division. These divisions were, in
that country, as well military as civil; and each contained a hundred
freemen; who were subject to an officer called the _centenarius_; a
number of which _centenarii_ were themselves subject to a superior
officer called the count or _comes_[c]. And indeed this institution of
hundreds may be traced back as far as the antient Germans, from whom
were derived both the Franks who became masters of Gaul, and the
Saxons who settled in England. For we read in Tacitus[d], that both
the thing and the name were well known to that warlike people.
"_Centeni ex singulis pagis sunt, idque ipsum inter suos vocantur; et
quod primo numerus fuit, jam nomen et honor est._"

[Footnote b: Seld. tit. of hon. 2. 5. 3.]

[Footnote c: Montesq. Sp. L. 30. 17.]

[Footnote d: _de morib. German._ 6.]

AN indefinite number of these hundreds make up a county or shire.
Shire is a Saxon word signifying a division; but a county,
_comitatus_, is plainly derived from _comes_, the count of the Franks;
that is, the earl, or alderman (as the Saxons called him) of the
shire, to whom the government of it was intrusted. This he usually
exercised by his deputy, still called in Latin _vice-comes_, and in
English the sheriff, shrieve, or shire-reeve, signifying the officer
of the shire; upon whom by process of time the civil administration of
it is now totally devolved. In some counties there is an intermediate
division, between the shire and the hundreds, as lathes in Kent, and
rapes in Sussex, each of them containing about three or four hundreds
apiece. These had formerly their lathe-reeves and rape-reeves, acting
in subordination to the shire-reeve. Where a county is divided into
_three_ of these intermediate jurisdictions, they are called
trithings[e], which were antiently governed by a trithing-reeve. These
trithings still subsist in the large county of York, where by an easy
corruption they are denominated ridings; the north, the east, and the
west-riding. The number of counties in England and Wales have been
different at different times: at present there are forty in England,
and twelve in Wales.

[Footnote e: _LL. Edw._ _c._ 34.]

THREE of these counties, Chester, Durham, and Lancaster, are called
counties palatine. The two former are such by prescription, or
immemorial custom; or, at least as old as the Norman conquest[f]: the
latter was created by king Edward III, in favour of Henry Plantagenet,
first earl and then duke of Lancaster, whose heiress John of Gant the
king's son had married; and afterwards confirmed in parliament, to
honour John of Gant himself; whom, on the death of his father-in-law,
he had also created duke of Lancaster[g]. Counties palatine are so
called _a palatio_; because the owners thereof, the earl of Chester,
the bishop of Durham, and the duke of Lancaster, had in those counties
_jura regalia_, as fully as the king hath in his palace; _regalem
potestatem in omnibus_, as Bracton expresses it[h]. They might pardon
treasons, murders, and felonies; they appointed all judges and
justices of the peace; all writs and indictments ran in their names,
as in other counties in the king's; and all offences were said to be
done against their peace, and not, as in other places, _contra pacem
domini regis_[i]. And indeed by the antient law, in all peculiar
jurisdictions, offences were said to be done against his peace in
whose court they were tried; in a court leet, _contra pacem domini_;
in the court of a corporation, _contra pacem ballivorum_; in the
sheriff's court or tourn, _contra pacem vice-comitis_[k]. These
palatine privileges were in all probability originally granted to the
counties of Chester and Durham, because they bordered upon enemies
countries, Wales and Scotland; in order that the owners, being
encouraged by so large an authority, might be the more watchful in
it's defence; and that the inhabitants, having justice administered at
home, might not be obliged to go out of the county, and leave it open
to the enemies incursions. And upon this account also there were
formerly two other counties palatine, Pembrokeshire and Hexamshire,
the latter now united with Northumberland: but these were abolished by
parliament, the former in 27 Hen. VIII, the latter in 14 Eliz. And in
27 Hen. VIII likewise, the powers beforementioned of owners of
counties palatine were abridged; the reason for their continuance in a
manner ceasing: though still all writs are witnessed in their names,
and all forfeitures for treason by the common law accrue to them[l].

[Footnote f: Seld. tit. hon. 2. 5. 8.]

[Footnote g: Plowd. 215.]

[Footnote h: _l._ 3. _c._ 8. §. 4.]

[Footnote i: 4. Inst. 204.]

[Footnote k: Seld. _in Hengham magn._ _c._ 2.]

[Footnote l: 4 Inst. 205.]

OF these three, the county of Durham is now the only one remaining in
the hands of a subject. For the earldom of Chester, as Camden
testifies, was united to the crown by Henry III, and has ever since
given title to the king's eldest son. And the county palatine, or
duchy, of Lancaster was the property of Henry of Bolinbroke, the son
of John of Gant, at the time when he wrested the crown from king
Richard II, and assumed the title of Henry IV. But he was too prudent
to suffer this to be united to the crown, lest, if he lost one, he
should lose the other also. For, as Plowden[m] and sir Edward Coke[n]
observe, "he knew he had the duchy of Lancaster by sure and
indefeasible title, but that his title to the crown was not so
assured: for that after the decease of Richard II the right of the
crown was in the heir of Lionel duke of Clarence, _second_ son of
Edward III; John of Gant, father to this Henry IV, being but the
_fourth_ son." And therefore he procured an act of parliament, in the
first year of his reign, to keep it distinct and separate from the
crown, and so it descended to his son, and grandson, Henry V, and
Henry VI. Henry VI being attainted in 1 Edw. IV, this duchy was
declared in parliament to have become forfeited to the crown[o], and
at the same time an act was made to keep it still distinct and
separate from other inheritances of the crown. And in 1 Hen. VII
another act was made to vest the inheritance thereof in Henry VII and
his heirs; and in this state, say sir Edward Coke[p] and Lambard[q],
viz. in the natural heirs or posterity of Henry VII, did the right of
the duchy remain to their days; a separate and distinct inheritance
from that of the crown of England[r].

[Footnote m: 215.]

[Footnote n: 4 Inst. 205.]

[Footnote o: 1 Ventr. 155.]

[Footnote p: 4 Inst. 206.]

[Footnote q: Archeion. 233.]

[Footnote r: If this notion of Lambard and Coke be well founded, it
might have become a very curious question at the time of the
revolution in 1688, in whom the right of the duchy remained after king
James's abdication. The attainder indeed of the pretended prince of
Wales (by statute 13 W. III. c. 3.) has now put the matter out of
doubt. And yet, to give that attainder it's full force in this
respect, the object of it must have been supposed legitimate, else he
had no interest to forfeit.]

THE isle of Ely is not a county palatine, though sometimes erroneously
called so; but only a royal franchise; the bishop having, by grant of
king Henry the first, _jura regalia_ within the isle of Ely, and
thereby he exercises a jurisdiction over all causes, as well criminal,
as civil[s].

[Footnote s: 4 Inst. 220.]

THERE are also counties _corporate_; which are certain cities and
towns, some with more, some with less territory annexed to them; to
which out of special grace and favour the kings of England have
granted to be counties of themselves, and not to be comprized in any
other county; but to be governed by their own sheriffs and other
magistrates, so that no officers of the county at large have any power
to intermeddle therein. Such are London, York, Bristol, Norwich,
Coventry, and many others. And thus much of the countries subject to
the laws of England.




COMMENTARIES

ON THE

LAWS OF ENGLAND.




BOOK THE FIRST.

OF THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS.




CHAPTER THE FIRST.

OF THE ABSOLUTE RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.


THE objects of the laws of England are so very numerous and extensive,
that, in order to consider them with any tolerable ease and
perspicuity, it will be necessary to distribute them methodically,
under proper and distinct heads; avoiding as much as possible
divisions too large and comprehensive on the one hand, and too
trifling and minute on the other; both of which are equally productive
of confusion.

NOW, as municipal law is a rule of civil conduct, commanding what is
right, and prohibiting what is wrong; or, as Cicero[a], and after him
our Bracton[b], has expressed it, _sanctio justa, jubens honesta et
prohibens contraria_; it follows, that the primary and principal
objects of the law are RIGHTS, and WRONGS. In the prosecution
therefore of these commentaries, I shall follow this very simple and
obvious division; and shall in the first place consider the _rights_
that are commanded, and secondly the _wrongs_ that are forbidden by
the laws of England.

[Footnote a: 11 _Philipp._ 12.]

[Footnote b: _l._ 1. _c._ 3.]

RIGHTS are however liable to another subdivision; being either, first,
those which concern, and are annexed to the persons of men, and are
then called _jura personarum_ or the _rights of persons_; or they are,
secondly, such as a man may acquire over external objects, or things
unconnected with his person, which are stiled _jura rerum_ or the
_rights of things_. Wrongs also are divisible into, first, _private
wrongs_, which, being an infringement merely of particular rights,
concern individuals only, and are called civil injuries; and secondly,
_public wrongs_, which, being a breach of general and public rights,
affect the whole community, and are called crimes and misdemesnors.

THE objects of the laws of England falling into this fourfold
division, the present commentaries will therefore consist of the four
following parts: 1. _The rights of persons_; with the means whereby
such rights may be either acquired or lost. 2. _The rights of things_;
with the means also of acquiring and losing them. 3. _Private wrongs_,
or civil injuries; with the means of redressing them by law. 4.
_Public wrongs_, or crimes and misdemesnors; with the means of
prevention and punishment.

WE are now, first, to consider _the rights of persons_; with the means
of acquiring and losing them.

NOW the rights of persons that are commanded to be observed by the
municipal law are of two sorts; first, such as are due _from_ every
citizen, which are usually called civil _duties_; and, secondly, such
as belong _to_ him, which is the more popular acceptation of _rights_
or _jura_. Both may indeed be comprized in this latter division; for,
as all social duties are of a relative nature, at the same time that
they are due _from_ one man, or set of men, they must also be due _to_
another. But I apprehend it will be more clear and easy, to consider
many of them as duties required from, rather than as rights belonging
to, particular persons. Thus, for instance, allegiance is usually, and
therefore most easily, considered as the duty of the people, and
protection as the duty of the magistrate; and yet they are,
reciprocally, the rights as well as duties of each other. Allegiance
is the right of the magistrate, and protection the right of the
people.

PERSONS also are divided by the law into either natural persons, or
artificial. Natural persons are such as the God of nature formed us:
artificial are such as created and devised by human laws for the
purposes of society and government; which are called corporations or
bodies politic.

THE rights of persons considered in their natural capacities are also
of two sorts, absolute, and relative. Absolute, which are such as
appertain and belong to particular men, merely as individuals or
single persons: relative, which are incident to them as members of
society, and standing in various relations to each other. The first,
that is, absolute rights, will be the subject of the present chapter.

BY the absolute _rights_ of individuals we mean those which are so in
their primary and strictest sense; such as would belong to their
persons merely in a state of nature, and which every man is intitled
to enjoy whether out of society or in it. But with regard to the
absolute _duties_, which man is bound to perform considered as a mere
individual, it is not to be expected that any human municipal laws
should at all explain or enforce them. For the end and intent of such
laws being only to regulate the behaviour of mankind, as they are
members of society, and stand in various relations to each other, they
have consequently no business or concern with any but social or
relative duties. Let a man therefore be ever so abandoned in his
principles, or vitious in his practice, provided he keeps his
wickedness to himself, and does not offend against the rules of public
decency, he is out of the reach of human laws. But if he makes his
vices public, though they be such as seem principally to affect
himself, (as drunkenness, or the like) they then become, by the bad
example they set, of pernicious effects to society; and therefore it
is then the business of human laws to correct them. Here the
circumstance of publication is what alters the nature of the case.
_Public_ sobriety is a relative duty, and therefore enjoined by our
laws: _private_ sobriety is an absolute duty, which, whether it be
performed or not, human tribunals can never know; and therefore they
can never enforce it by any civil sanction. But, with respect to
_rights_, the case is different. Human laws define and enforce as well
those rights which belong to a man considered as an individual, as
those which belong to him considered as related to others.

FOR the principal aim of society is to protect individuals in the
enjoyment of those absolute rights, which were vested in them by the
immutable laws of nature; but which could not be preserved in peace
without that mutual assistance and intercourse, which is gained by the
institution of friendly and social communities. Hence it follows, that
the first and primary end of human laws is to maintain and regulate
these _absolute_ rights of individuals. Such rights as are social and
_relative_ result from, and are posterior to, the formation of states
and societies: so that to maintain and regulate these, is clearly a
subsequent consideration. And therefore the principal view of human
laws is, or ought always to be, to explain, protect, and enforce such
rights as are absolute, which in themselves are few and simple; and,
then, such rights as are relative, which arising from a variety of
connexions, will be far more numerous and more complicated. These will
take up a greater space in any code of laws, and hence may appear to
be more attended to, though in reality they are not, than the rights
of the former kind. Let us therefore proceed to examine how far all
laws ought, and how far the laws of England actually do, take notice
of these absolute rights, and provide for their lasting security.

THE absolute rights of man, considered as a free agent, endowed with
discernment to know good from evil, and with power of choosing those
measures which appear to him to be most desirable, are usually summed
up in one general appellation, and denominated the natural liberty of
mankind. This natural liberty consists properly in a power of acting
as one thinks fit, without any restraint or control, unless by the law
of nature: being a right inherent in us by birth, and one of the gifts
of God to man at his creation, when he endued him with the faculty of
freewill. But every man, when he enters into society, gives up a part
of his natural liberty, as the price of so valuable a purchase; and,
in consideration of receiving the advantages of mutual commerce,
obliges himself to conform to those laws, which the community has
thought proper to establish. And this species of legal obedience and
conformity is infinitely more desirable, than that wild and savage
liberty which is sacrificed to obtain it. For no man, that considers a
moment, would wish to retain the absolute and uncontroled power of
doing whatever he pleases; the consequence of which is, that every
other man would also have the same power; and then there would be no
security to individuals in any of the enjoyments of life. Political
therefore, or civil, liberty, which is that of a member of society, is
no other than natural liberty so far restrained by human laws (and no
farther) as is necessary and expedient for the general advantage of
the publick[c]. Hence we may collect that the law, which restrains a
man from doing mischief to his fellow citizens, though it diminishes
the natural, increases the civil liberty of mankind: but every wanton
and causeless restraint of the will of the subject, whether practiced
by a monarch, a nobility, or a popular assembly, is a degree of
tyranny. Nay, that even laws themselves, whether made with or without
our consent, if they regulate and constrain our conduct in matters of
mere indifference, without any good end in view, are laws destructive
of liberty: whereas if any public advantage can arise from observing
such precepts, the control of our private inclinations, in one or two
particular points, will conduce to preserve our general freedom in
others of more importance; by supporting that state, of society, which
alone can secure our independence. Thus the statute of king Edward
IV[d], which forbad the fine gentlemen of those times (under the
degree of a lord) to wear pikes upon their shoes or boots of more than
two inches in length, was a law that savoured of oppression; because,
however ridiculous the fashion then in use might appear, the
restraining it by pecuniary penalties could serve no purpose of common
utility. But the statute of king Charles II[e], which prescribes a
thing seemingly as indifferent; viz. a dress for the dead, who are all
ordered to be buried in woollen; is a law consistent with public
liberty, for it encourages the staple trade, on which in great measure
depends the universal good of the nation. So that laws, when prudently
framed, are by no means subversive but rather introductive of liberty;
for (as Mr Locke has well observed[f]) where there is no law, there is
no freedom. But then, on the other hand, that constitution or frame of
government, that system of laws, is alone calculated to maintain civil
liberty, which leaves the subject entire master of his own conduct,
except in those points wherein the public good requires some direction
or restraint.

[Footnote c: _Facultas ejus, quod cuique facere libet, nisi quid jure
prohibetur._ _Inst._ 1. 3. 1.]

[Footnote d: 3 Edw. IV. c. 5.]

[Footnote e: 30 Car. II. st. 1. c. 3.]

[Footnote f: on Gov. p. 2. §. 57.]

THE idea and practice of this political or civil liberty flourish in
their highest vigour in these kingdoms, where it falls little short
of perfection, and can only be lost or destroyed by the folly or
demerits of it's owner: the legislature, and of course the laws of
England, being peculiarly adapted to the preservation of this
inestimable blessing even in the meanest subject. Very different from
the modern constitutions of other states, on the continent of Europe,
and from the genius of the imperial law; which in general are
calculated to vest an arbitrary and despotic power of controlling the
actions of the subject in the prince, or in a few grandees. And this
spirit of liberty is so deeply implanted in our constitution, and
rooted even in our very soil, that a slave or a negro, the moment he
lands in England, falls under the protection of the laws, and with
regard to all natural rights becomes _eo instanti_ a freeman[g].

[Footnote g: Salk. 666.]

THE absolute rights of every Englishman (which, taken in a political
and extensive sense, are usually called their liberties) as they are
founded on nature and reason, so they are coeval with our form of
government; though subject at times to fluctuate and change: their
establishment (excellent as it is) being still human. At some times we
have seen them depressed by overbearing and tyrannical princes; at
others so luxuriant as even to tend to anarchy, a worse state than
tyranny itself, as any government is better than none at all. But the
vigour of our free constitution has always delivered the nation from
these embarrassments, and, as soon as the convulsions consequent on
the struggle have been over, the ballance of our rights and liberties
has settled to it's proper level; and their fundamental articles have
been from time to time asserted in parliament, as often as they were
thought to be in danger.

FIRST, by the great charter of liberties, which was obtained, sword in
hand, from king John; and afterwards, with some alterations, confirmed
in parliament by king Henry the third, his son. Which charter
contained very few new grants; but, as sir Edward Coke[h] observes,
was for the most part declaratory of the principal grounds of the
fundamental laws of England. Afterwards by the statute called
_confirmatio cartarum_[i], whereby the great charter is directed to be
allowed as the common law; all judgments contrary to it are declared
void; copies of it are ordered to be sent to all cathedral churches,
and read twice a year to the people; and sentence of excommunication
is directed to be as constantly denounced against all those that by
word, deed, or counsel act contrary thereto, or in any degree infringe
it. Next by a multitude of subsequent corroborating statutes, (sir
Edward Coke, I think, reckons thirty two[k],) from the first Edward to
Henry the fourth. Then, after a long interval, by _the petition of
right_; which was a parliamentary declaration of the liberties of the
people, assented to by king Charles the first in the beginning of his
reign. Which was closely followed by the still more ample concessions
made by that unhappy prince to his parliament, before the fatal
rupture between them; and by the many salutary laws, particularly the
_habeas corpus_ act, passed under Charles the second. To these
succeeded _the bill of rights_, or declaration delivered by the lords
and commons to the prince and princess of Orange 13 February 1688; and
afterwards enacted in parliament, when they became king and queen:
which declaration concludes in these remarkable words; "and they do
claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the premises, as their
undoubted rights and liberties." And the act of parliament itself[l]
recognizes "all and singular the rights and liberties asserted and
claimed in the said declaration to be the true, antient, and
indubitable rights of the people of this kingdom." Lastly, these
liberties were again asserted at the commencement of the present
century, in the _act of settlement_[m], whereby the crown is limited
to his present majesty's illustrious house, and some new provisions
were added at the same fortunate aera for better securing our
religion, laws, and liberties; which the statute declares to be "the
birthright of the people of England;" according to the antient
doctrine of the common law[n].

[Footnote h: 2 Inst. proem.]

[Footnote i: 25 Edw. I.]

[Footnote k: 2 Inst. proem.]

[Footnote l: 1 W. and M. st. 2. c. 2.]

[Footnote m: 12 & 13 W. III. c. 2.]

[Footnote n: Plowd. 55.]

THUS much for the _declaration_ of our rights and liberties. The
rights themselves thus defined by these several statutes, consist in a
number of private immunities; which will appear, from what has been
premised, to be indeed no other, than either that _residuum_ of
natural liberty, which is not required by the laws of society to be
sacrificed to public convenience; or else those civil privileges,
which society hath engaged to provide, in lieu of the natural
liberties so given up by individuals. These therefore were formerly,
either by inheritance or purchase, the rights of all mankind; but, in
most other countries of the world being now more or less debased and
destroyed, they at present may be said to remain, in a peculiar and
emphatical manner, the rights of the people of England. And these may
be reduced to three principal or primary articles; the right of
personal security, the right of personal liberty; and the right of
private property: because as there is no other known method of
compulsion, or of abridging man's natural free will, but by an
infringement or diminution of one or other of these important rights,
the preservation of these, inviolate, may justly be said to include
the preservation of our civil immunities in their largest and most
extensive sense.

I. THE right of personal security consists in a person's legal and
uninterrupted enjoyment of his life, his limbs, his body, his health,
and his reputation.

1. LIFE is the immediate gift of God, a right inherent by nature in
every individual; and it begins in contemplation of law as soon as an
infant is able to stir in the mother's womb. For if a woman is quick
with child, and by a potion, or otherwise, killeth it in her womb; or
if any one beat her, whereby the child dieth in her body, and she is
delivered of a dead child; this, though not murder, was by the antient
law homicide or manslaughter[o]. But at present it is not looked upon
in quite so atrocious a light, though it remains a very heinous
misdemesnor[p].

[Footnote o: _Si aliquis mulierem praegnantem percusserit, vel ei
venenum dederit, per quod fecerit abortivam; si puerperium jam
formatum fuerit, et maxime si fuerit animatum, facit homicidium._
Bracton. _l._ 3. _c._ 21.]

[Footnote p: 3 Inst. 90.]

AN infant _in ventre sa mere_, or in the mother's womb, is supposed in
law to be born for many purposes. It is capable of having a legacy, or
a surrender of a copyhold estate made to it. It may have a guardian
assigned to it[q]; and it is enabled to have an estate limited to it's
use, and to take afterwards by such limitation, as if it were then
actually born[r]. And in this point the civil law agrees with ours[s].

[Footnote q: Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 24.]

[Footnote r: Stat. 10 & 11 W. III. c. 16.]

[Footnote s: _Qui in utero sunt, in jure civili intelliguntur in rerum
natura esse, cum de eorum commodo agatur._ _Ff._ 1. 5. 26.]

2. A MAN'S limbs, (by which for the present we only understand those
members which may be useful to him in fight, and the loss of which
only amounts to mayhem by the common law) are also the gift of the
wise creator; to enable man to protect himself from external injuries
in a state of nature. To these therefore he has a natural inherent
right; and they cannot be wantonly destroyed or disabled without a
manifest breach of civil liberty.

BOTH the life and limbs of a man are of such high value, in the
estimation of the law of England, that it pardons even homicide if
committed _se defendendo_, or in order to preserve them. For whatever
is done by a man, to save either life or member, is looked upon as
done upon the highest necessity and compulsion. Therefore if a man
through fear of death or mayhem is prevailed upon to execute a deed,
or do any other legal act; these, though accompanied with all other
the requisite solemnities, are totally void in law, if forced upon him
by a well-grounded apprehension of losing his life, or even his limbs,
in case of his non-compliance[t]. And the same is also a sufficient
excuse for the commission of many misdemesnors, as will appear in the
fourth book. The constraint a man is under in these circumstances is
called in law _duress_, from the Latin _durities_, of which there are
two sorts; duress of imprisonment, where a man actually loses his
liberty, of which we shall presently speak; and duress _per minas_,
where the hardship is only threatened and impending, which is that we
are now discoursing of. Duress _per minas_ is either for fear of loss
of life, or else for fear of mayhem, or loss of limb. And this fear
must be upon sufficient reason; "_non_," as Bracton expresses it,
"_suspicio cujuslibet vani et meticulosi hominis, sed talis qui possit
cadere in virum constantem; talis enim debet esse metus, qui in se
contineat vitae periculum, aut corporis cruciatum_[u]." A fear of
battery, or being beaten, though never so well grounded, is no duress;
neither is the fear of having one's house burnt, or one's goods taken
away and destroyed; because in these cases, should the threat be
performed, a man may have satisfaction by recovering equivalent
damages[w]: but no suitable atonement can be made for the loss of
life, or limb. And the indulgence shewn to a man under this, the
principal, sort of duress, the fear of losing his life or limbs,
agrees also with that maxim of the civil law; _ignoscitur ei qui
sanguinem suum qualiter qualiter redemptum voluit_[x].

[Footnote t: 2 Inst. 483.]

[Footnote u: _l._ 2. _c._ 5.]

[Footnote w: 2 Inst. 483.]

[Footnote x: _Ff._ 48. 21. 1.]

THE law not only regards life and member, and protects every man in
the enjoyment of them, but also furnishes him with every thing
necessary for their support. For there is no man so indigent or
wretched, but he may demand a supply sufficient for all the
necessities of life, from the more opulent part of the community, by
means of the several statutes enacted for the relief of the poor, of
which in their proper places. A humane provision; yet, though dictated
by the principles of society, discountenanced by the Roman laws. For
the edicts of the emperor Constantine, commanding the public to
maintain the children of those who were unable to provide for them, in
order to prevent the murder and exposure of infants, an institution
founded on the same principle as our foundling hospitals, though
comprized in the Theodosian code[y], were rejected in Justinian's
collection.

[Footnote y: _l._ 11. _t._ 27.]

THESE rights, of life and member, can only be determined by the death
of the person; which is either a civil or natural death. The civil
death commences if any man be banished the realm[z] by the process of
the common law, or enters into religion; that is, goes into a
monastery, and becomes there a monk professed: in which cases he is
absolutely dead in law, and his next heir shall have his estate. For,
such banished man is entirely cut off from society; and such a monk,
upon his profession, renounces solemnly all secular concerns: and
besides, as the popish clergy claimed an exemption from the duties of
civil life, and the commands of the temporal magistrate, the genius of
the English law would not suffer those persons to enjoy the benefits
of society, who secluded themselves from it, and refused to submit to
it's regulations[a]. A monk is therefore accounted _civiliter
mortuus_, and when he enters into religion may, like other dying men,
make his testament and executors; or, if he makes none, the ordinary
may grant administration to his next of kin, as if he were actually
dead intestate. And such executors and administrators shall have the
same power, and may bring the same actions for debts due _to_ the
religious, and are liable to the same actions for those due _from_
him, as if he were naturally deceased[b]. Nay, so far has this
principle been carried, that when one was bound in a bond to an abbot
and his successors, and afterwards made his executors and professed
himself a monk of the same abbey, and in process of time was himself
made abbot thereof; here the law gave him, in the capacity of abbot,
an action of debt against his own executors to recover the money
due[c]. In short, a monk or religious is so effectually dead in law,
that a lease made even to a third person, during the life (generally)
of one who afterwards becomes a monk, determines by such his entry
into religion: for which reason leases, and other conveyances, for
life, are usually made to have and to hold for the term of one's
_natural_ life[d].

[Footnote z: Co. Litt. 133.]

[Footnote a: This was also a rule in the feodal law, _l._ 2. _t._ 21.
_desiit esse miles seculi, qui factus est miles Christi; nec
beneficium pertinet ad eum qui non debet gerere officium_.]

[Footnote b: Litt. §. 200.]

[Footnote c: Co. Litt. 133 _b._]

[Footnote d: 2 Rep. 48. Co. Litt. 132.]

THIS natural life being, as was before observed, the immediate
donation of the great creator, cannot legally be disposed of or
destroyed by any individual, neither by the person himself nor by any
other of his fellow creatures, merely upon their own authority. Yet
nevertheless it may, by the divine permission, be frequently forfeited
for the breach of those laws of society, which are enforced by the
sanction of capital punishments; of the nature, restrictions,
expedience, and legality of which, we may hereafter more conveniently
enquire in the concluding book of these commentaries. At present, I
shall only observe, that whenever the _constitution_ of a state vests
in any man, or body of men, a power of destroying at pleasure, without
the direction of laws, the lives or members of the subject, such
constitution is in the highest degree tyrannical: and that whenever
any _laws_ direct such destruction for light and trivial causes, such
laws are likewise tyrannical, though in an inferior degree; because
here the subject is aware of the danger he is exposed to, and may by
prudent caution provide against it. The statute law of England does
therefore very seldom, and the common law does never, inflict any
punishment extending to life or limb, unless upon the highest
necessity: and the constitution is an utter stranger to any arbitrary
power of killing or maiming the subject without the express warrant of
law. "_Nullus liber homo_, says the great charter[e], _aliquo modo
destruatur, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum aut per legem
terrae._" Which words, "_aliquo modo destruatur_," according to sir
Edward Coke[f], include a prohibition not only of _killing_, and
_maiming_, but also of _torturing_ (to which our laws are strangers)
and of every oppression by colour of an illegal authority. And it is
enacted by the statute 5 Edw. III. c. 9. that no man shall be
forejudged of life or limb, contrary to the great charter and the law
of the land: and again, by statute 28 Ed. III. c. 3. that no man
shall be put to death, without being brought to answer by due process
of law.

[Footnote e: c. 29.]

[Footnote f: 2 Inst. 48.]

3. BESIDES those limbs and members that may be necessary to man, in
order to defend himself or annoy his enemy, the rest of his person or
body is also entitled by the same natural right to security from the
corporal insults of menaces, assaults, beating, and wounding; though
such insults amount not to destruction of life or member.

4. THE preservation of a man's health from such practices as may
prejudice or annoy it, and

5. THE security of his reputation or good name from the arts of
detraction and slander, are rights to which every man is intitled, by
reason and natural justice; since without these it is impossible to
have the perfect enjoyment of any other advantage or right. But these
three last articles (being of much less importance than those which
have gone before, and those which are yet to come) it will suffice to
have barely mentioned among the rights of persons; referring the more
minute discussion of their several branches, to those parts of our
commentaries which treat of the infringement of these rights, under
the head of personal wrongs.

II. NEXT to personal security, the law of England regards, asserts,
and preserves the personal liberty of individuals. This personal
liberty consists in the power of loco-motion, of changing situation,
or removing one's person to whatsoever place one's own inclination may
direct; without imprisonment or restraint, unless by due course of
law. Concerning which we may make the same observations as upon the
preceding article; that it is a right strictly natural; that the laws
of England have never abridged it without sufficient cause; and, that
in this kingdom it cannot ever be abridged at the mere discretion of
the magistrate, without the explicit permission of the laws. Here
again the language of the great charter[g] is, that no freeman shall
be taken or imprisoned, but by the lawful judgment of his equals, or
by the law of the land. And many subsequent old statutes[h] expressly
direct, that no man shall be taken or imprisoned by suggestion or
petition to the king, or his council, unless it be by legal
indictment, or the process of the common law. By the petition of
right, 3 Car. I, it is enacted, that no freeman shall be imprisoned or
detained without cause shewn, to which he may make answer according to
law. By 16 Car. I. c. 10. if any person be restrained of his liberty
by order or decree of any illegal court, or by command of the king's
majesty in person, or by warrant of the council board, or of any of
the privy council; he shall, upon demand of his counsel, have a writ
of _habeas corpus_, to bring his body before the court of king's bench
or common pleas; who shall determine whether the cause of his
commitment be just, and thereupon do as to justice shall appertain.
And by 31 Car. II. c. 2. commonly called _the habeas corpus act_, the
methods of obtaining this writ are so plainly pointed out and
enforced, that, so long as this statute remains unimpeached, no
subject of England can be long detained in prison, except in those
cases in which the law requires and justifies such detainer. And, lest
this act should be evaded by demanding unreasonable bail, or sureties
for the prisoner's appearance, it is declared by 1 W. & M. st. 2. c.
2. that excessive bail ought not to be required.

[Footnote g: c. 29.]

[Footnote h: 5 Edw. III. c. 9. 25 Edw. III. st. 5. c. 4. and 28 Edw.
III. c. 3.]

OF great importance to the public is the preservation of this personal
liberty: for if once it were left in the power of any, the highest,
magistrate to imprison arbitrarily whomever he or his officers thought
proper, (as in France it is daily practiced by the crown) there would
soon be an end of all other rights and immunities. Some have thought,
that unjust attacks, even upon life, or property, at the arbitrary
will of the magistrate, are less dangerous to the commonwealth, than
such as are made upon the personal liberty of the subject. To bereave
a man of life, or by violence to confiscate his estate, without
accusation or trial, would be so gross and notorious an act of
despotism, as must at once convey the alarm of tyranny throughout the
whole kingdom. But confinement of the person, by secretly hurrying him
to gaol, where his sufferings are unknown or forgotten; is a less
public, a less striking, and therefore a more dangerous engine of
arbitrary government. And yet sometimes, when the state is in real
danger, even this may be a necessary measure. But the happiness of our
constitution is, that it is not left to the executive power to
determine when the danger of the state is so great, as to render this
measure expedient. For the parliament only, or legislative power,
whenever it sees proper, can authorize the crown, by suspending the
_habeas corpus_ act for a short and limited time, to imprison
suspected persons without giving any reason for so doing. As the
senate of Rome was wont to have recourse to a dictator, a magistrate
of absolute authority, when they judged the republic in any imminent
danger. The decree of the senate, which usually preceded the
nomination of this magistrate, "_dent operam consules, nequid
respublica detrimenti capiat_," was called the _senatus consultum
ultimae necessitatis_. In like manner this experiment ought only to be
tried in cases of extreme emergency; and in these the nation parts
with it's liberty for a while, in order to preserve it for ever.

THE confinement of the person, in any wise, is an imprisonment. So
that the keeping a man against his will in a private house, putting
him in the stocks, arresting or forcibly detaining him in the street,
is an imprisonment[i]. And the law so much discourages unlawful
confinement, that if a man is under _duress of imprisonment_, which we
before explained to mean a compulsion by an illegal restraint of
liberty, until he seals a bond or the like; he may alledge this
duress, and avoid the extorted bond. But if a man be lawfully
imprisoned, and either to procure his discharge, or on any other fair
account, seals a bond or a deed, this is not by duress of
imprisonment, and he is not at liberty to avoid it[k]. To make
imprisonment lawful, it must either be, by process from the courts of
judicature, or by warrant from some legal officer, having authority
to commit to prison; which warrant must be in writing, under the hand
and seal of the magistrate, and express the causes of the commitment,
in order to be examined into (if necessary) upon a _habeas corpus_. If
there be no cause expressed, the goaler is not bound to detain the
prisoner[l]. For the law judges in this respect, saith sir Edward
Coke, like Festus the Roman governor; that it is unreasonable to send
a prisoner, and not to signify withal the crimes alleged against him.

[Footnote i: 2 Inst. 589.]

[Footnote k: 2 Inst. 482.]

[Footnote l: 2 Inst. 52, 53.]

A NATURAL and regular consequence of this personal liberty, is, that
every Englishman may claim a right to abide in his own country so long
as he pleases; and not to be driven from it unless by the sentence of
the law. The king indeed, by his royal prerogative, may issue out his
writ _ne exeat regnum_, and prohibit any of his subjects from going
into foreign parts without licence[m]. This may be necessary for the
public service, and safeguard of the commonwealth. But no power on
earth, except the authority of parliament, can send any subject of
England _out of_ the land against his will; no not even a criminal.
For exile, or transportation, is a punishment unknown to the common
law; and, wherever it is now inflicted, it is either by the choice of
the criminal himself, to escape a capital punishment, or else by the
express direction of some modern act of parliament. To this purpose
the great charter[n] declares that no freeman shall be banished,
unless by the judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land. And by
the _habeas corpus_ act, 31 Car. II. c. 2. (that second _magna carta_,
and stable bulwark of our liberties) it is enacted, that no subject of
this realm, who is an inhabitant of England, Wales, or Berwick, shall
be sent prisoner into Scotland, Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey, or places
beyond the seas; (where they cannot have the benefit and protection of
the common law) but that all such imprisonments shall be illegal; that
the person, who shall dare to commit another contrary to this law,
shall be disabled from bearing any office, shall incur the penalty of
a praemunire, and be incapable of receiving the king's pardon: and
the party suffering shall also have his private action against the
person committing, and all his aiders, advisers and abettors, and
shall recover treble costs; besides his damages, which no jury shall
assess at less than five hundred pounds.

[Footnote m: F.N.B. 85.]

[Footnote n: cap. 29.]

THE law is in this respect so benignly and liberally construed for the
benefit of the subject, that, though _within_ the realm the king may
command the attendance and service of all his liege-men, yet he cannot
send any man _out of_ the realm, even upon the public service: he
cannot even constitute a man lord deputy or lieutenant of Ireland
against his will, nor make him a foreign embassador[o]. For this might
in reality be no more than an honorable exile.

[Footnote o: 2 Inst. 47.]

III. THE third absolute right, inherent in every Englishman, is that
of property; which consists in the free use, enjoyment, and disposal
of all his acquisitions, without any control or diminution, save only
by the laws of the land. The original of private property is probably
founded in nature, as will be more fully explained in the second book
of the ensuing commentaries: but certainly the modifications under
which we at present find it, the method of conserving it in the
present owner, and of translating it from man to man, are entirely
derived from society; and are some of those civil advantages, in
exchange for which every individual has resigned a part of his natural
liberty. The laws of England are therefore, in point of honor and
justice, extremely watchful in ascertaining and protecting this right.
Upon this principle the great charter[p] has declared that no freeman
shall be disseised, or divested, of his freehold, or of his liberties,
or free customs, but by the judgment of his peers, or by the law of
the land. And by a variety of antient statutes[q] it is enacted, that
no man's lands or goods shall be seised into the king's hands, against
the great charter, and the law of the land; and that no man shall be
disinherited, nor put out of his franchises or freehold, unless he be
duly brought to answer, and be forejudged by course of law; and if any
thing be done to the contrary, it shall be redressed, and holden for
none.

[Footnote p: c. 29.]

[Footnote q: 5 Edw. III. c. 9. 25 Edw. III. st. 5. c. 4. 28 Edw. III.
c. 3.]

SO great moreover is the regard of the law for private property, that
it will not authorize the least violation of it; no, not even for the
general good of the whole community. If a new road, for instance, were
to be made through the grounds of a private person, it might perhaps
be extensively beneficial to the public; but the law permits no man,
or set of men, to do this without consent of the owner of the land. In
vain may it be urged, that the good of the individual ought to yield
to that of the community; for it would be dangerous to allow any
private man, or even any public tribunal, to be the judge of this
common good, and to decide whether it be expedient or no. Besides, the
public good is in nothing more essentially interested, than in the
protection of every individual's private rights, as modelled by the
municipal law. In this, and similar cases the legislature alone can,
and indeed frequently does, interpose, and compel the individual to
acquiesce. But how does it interpose and compel? Not by absolutely
stripping the subject of his property in an arbitrary manner; but by
giving him a full indemnification and equivalent for the injury
thereby sustained. The public is now considered as an individual,
treating with an individual for an exchange. All that the legislature
does is to oblige the owner to alienate his possessions for a
reasonable price; and even this is an exertion of power, which the
legislature indulges with caution, and which nothing but the
legislature can perform.

NOR is this the only instance in which the law of the land has
postponed even public necessity to the sacred and inviolable rights of
private property. For no subject of England can be constrained to pay
any aids or taxes, even for the defence of the realm or the support of
government, but such as are imposed by his own consent, or that of his
representatives in parliament. By the statute 25 Edw. I. c. 5 and 6.
it is provided, that the king shall not take any aids or tasks, but
by the common assent of the realm. And what that common assent is, is
more fully explained by 34 Edw. I. st. 4. cap. 1. which enacts, that
no talliage or aid shall be taken without assent of the arch-bishops,
bishops, earls, barons, knights, burgesses, and other freemen of the
land[r]: and again by 14 Edw. III. st. 2. c. 1. the prelates, earls,
barons, and commons, citizens, burgesses, and merchants shall not be
charged to make any aid, if it be not by the common assent of the
great men and commons in parliament. And as this fundamental law had
been shamefully evaded under many succeeding princes, by compulsive
loans, and benevolences extorted without a real and voluntary consent,
it was made an article in the petition of right 3 Car. I, that no man
shall be compelled to yield any gift, loan, or benevolence, tax, or
such like charge, without common consent by act of parliament. And,
lastly, by the statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. it is declared, that
levying money for or to the use of the crown, by pretence of
prerogative, without grant of parliament; or for longer time, or in
other manner, than the same is or shall be granted, is illegal.

[Footnote r: See the historical introduction to the great charter, &c,
_sub anno_ 1297; wherein it is shewn that this statute _de talliagio
non concedendo_, supposed to have been made in 34 Edw. I, is in
reality nothing more than a sort of translation into Latin of the
_confirmatio cartarum_, 25 Edw. I, which was originally published in
the Norman language.]

IN the three preceding articles we have taken a short view of the
principal absolute rights which appertain to every Englishman. But in
vain would these rights be declared, ascertained, and protected by the
dead letter of the laws, if the constitution had provided no other
method to secure their actual enjoyment. It has therefore established
certain other auxiliary subordinate rights of the subject, which serve
principally as barriers to protect and maintain inviolate the three
great and primary rights, of personal security, personal liberty, and
private property. These are,

1. THE constitution, powers, and privileges of parliament, of which I
shall treat at large in the ensuing chapter.

2. THE limitation of the king's prerogative, by bounds so certain and
notorious, that it is impossible he should exceed them without the
consent of the people. Of this also I shall treat in it's proper
place. The former of these keeps the legislative power in due health
and vigour, so as to make it improbable that laws should be enacted
destructive of general liberty: the latter is a guard upon the
executive power, by restraining it from acting either beyond or in
contradiction to the laws, that are framed and established by the
other.

3. A THIRD subordinate right of every Englishman is that of applying
to the courts of justice for redress of injuries. Since the law is in
England the supreme arbiter of every man's life, liberty, and
property, courts of justice must at all times be open to the subject,
and the law be duly administred therein. The emphatical words of
_magna carta_[s], spoken in the person of the king, who in judgment of
law (says sir Edward Coke[t]) is ever present and repeating them in
all his courts, are these; "_nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut
differemus rectum vel justitiam_: and therefore every subject,"
continues the same learned author, "for injury done to him _in bonis,
in terris, vel persona_, by any other subject, be he ecclesiastical or
temporal without any exception, may take his remedy by the course of
the law, and have justice and right for the injury done to him, freely
without sale, fully without any denial, and speedily without delay."
It were endless to enumerate all the _affirmative_ acts of parliament
wherein justice is directed to be done according to the law of the
land: and what that law is, every subject knows; or may know if he
pleases: for it depends not upon the arbitrary will of any judge; but
is permanent, fixed, and unchangeable, unless by authority of
parliament. I shall however just mention a few _negative_ statutes,
whereby abuses, perversions, or delays of justice, especially by the
prerogative, are restrained. It is ordained by _magna carta_[u], that
no freeman shall be outlawed, that is, put out of the protection and
benefit of the laws, but according to the law of the land. By 2 Edw.
III. c. 8. and 11 Ric. II. c. 10. it is enacted, that no commands or
letters shall be sent under the great seal, or the little seal, the
signet, or privy seal, in disturbance of the law; or to disturb or
delay common right: and, though such commandments should come, the
judges shall not cease to do right. And by 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. it
is declared, that the pretended power of suspending, or dispensing
with laws, or the execution of laws, by regal authority without
consent of parliament, is illegal.

[Footnote s: c. 29.]

[Footnote t: 2 Inst. 55.]

[Footnote u: c. 29.]

NOT only the substantial part, or judicial decisions, of the law, but
also the formal part, or method of proceeding, cannot be altered but
by parliament: for if once those outworks were demolished, there would
be no inlet to all manner of innovation in the body of the law itself.
The king, it is true, may erect new courts of justice; but then they
must proceed according to the old established forms of the common law.
For which reason it is declared in the statute 16 Car. I. c. 10. upon
the dissolution of the court of starchamber, that neither his majesty,
nor his privy council, have any jurisdiction, power, or authority by
English bill, petition, articles, libel (which were the course of
proceeding in the starchamber, borrowed from the civil law) or by any
other arbitrary way whatsoever, to examine, or draw into question,
determine or dispose of the lands or goods of any subjects of this
kingdom; but that the same ought to be tried and determined in the
ordinary courts of justice, and by _course of law_.

4. IF there should happen any uncommon injury, or infringement of the
rights beforementioned, which the ordinary course of law is too
defective to reach, there still remains a fourth subordinate right
appertaining to every individual, namely, the right of petitioning the
king, or either house of parliament, for the redress of grievances.
In Russia we are told[w] that the czar Peter established a law, that
no subject might petition the throne, till he had first petitioned two
different ministers of state. In case he obtained justice from
neither, he might then present a third petition to the prince; but
upon pain of death, if found to be in the wrong. The consequence of
which was, that no one dared to offer such third petition; and
grievances seldom falling under the notice of the sovereign, he had
little opportunity to redress them. The restrictions, for some there
are, which are laid upon petitioning in England, are of a nature
extremely different; and while they promote the spirit of peace, they
are no check upon that of liberty. Care only must be taken, lest,
under the pretence of petitioning, the subject be guilty of any riot
or tumult; as happened in the opening of the memorable parliament in
1640: and, to prevent this, it is provided by the statute 13 Car. II.
st. 1. c. 5. that no petition to the king, or either house of
parliament, for any alterations in church or state, shall be signed by
above twenty persons, unless the matter thereof be approved by three
justices of the peace or the major part of the grand jury, in the
country; and in London by the lord mayor, aldermen, and common
council; nor shall any petition be presented by more than two persons
at a time. But under these regulations, it is declared by the statute
1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. that the subject hath a right to petition; and
that all commitments and prosecutions for such petitioning are
illegal.

[Footnote w: Montesq. Sp. L. 12. 26.]

5. THE fifth and last auxiliary right of the subject, that I shall at
present mention, is that of having arms for their defence, suitable to
their condition and degree, and such as are allowed by law. Which is
also declared by the same statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. and is indeed
a public allowance, under due restrictions, of the natural right of
resistance and self-preservation, when the sanctions of society and
laws are found insufficient to restrain the violence of oppression.

IN these several articles consist the rights, or, as they are
frequently termed, the liberties of Englishmen: liberties more
generally talked of, than thoroughly understood; and yet highly
necessary to be perfectly known and considered by every man of rank or
property, lest his ignorance of the points whereon it is founded
should hurry him into faction and licentiousness on the one hand, or a
pusillanimous indifference and criminal submission on the other. And
we have seen that these rights consist, primarily, in the free
enjoyment of personal security, of personal liberty, and of private
property. So long as these remain inviolate, the subject is perfectly
free; for every species of compulsive tyranny and oppression must act
in opposition to one or other of these rights, having no other object
upon which it can possibly be employed. To preserve these from
violation, it is necessary that the constitution of parliaments be
supported in it's full vigor; and limits certainly known, be set to
the royal prerogative. And, lastly, to vindicate these rights, when
actually violated or attacked, the subjects of England are entitled,
in the first place, to the regular administration and free course of
justice in the courts of law; next to the right of petitioning the
king and parliament for redress of grievances; and lastly to the right
of having and using arms for self-preservation and defence. And all
these rights and liberties it is our birthright to enjoy entire;
unless where the laws of our country have laid them under necessary
restraints. Restraints in themselves so gentle and moderate, as will
appear upon farther enquiry, that no man of sense or probity would
wish to see them slackened. For all of us have it in our choice to do
every thing that a good man would desire to do; and are restrained
from nothing, but what would be pernicious either to ourselves or our
fellow citizens. So that this review of our situation may fully
justify the observation of a learned French author, who indeed
generally both thought and wrote in the spirit of genuine freedom[x];
and who hath not scrupled to profess, even in the very bosom of his
native country, that the English is the only nation in the world,
where political or civil liberty is the direct end of it's
constitution. Recommending therefore to the student in our laws a
farther and more accurate search into this extensive and important
title, I shall close my remarks upon it with the expiring wish of the
famous father Paul to his country, "ESTO PERPETUA!"

[Footnote x: Montesq. Sp. L. 11. 5.]




CHAPTER THE SECOND.

OF THE PARLIAMENT.


WE are next to treat of the rights and duties of persons, as they are
members of society, and stand in various relations to each other.
These relations are either public or private: and we will first
consider those that are public.

THE most universal public relation, by which men are connected
together, is that of government; namely, as governors and governed,
or, in other words, as magistrates and people. Of magistrates also
some are _supreme_, in whom the sovereign power of the state resides;
others are _subordinate_, deriving all their authority from the
supreme magistrate, accountable to him for their conduct, and acting
in an inferior secondary sphere.

IN all tyrannical governments the supreme magistracy, or the right
both of _making_ and of _enforcing_ the laws, is vested in one and the
same man, or one and the same body of men; and wherever these two
powers are united together, there can be no public liberty. The
magistrate may enact tyrannical laws, and execute them in a tyrannical
manner, since he is possessed, in quality of dispenser of justice,
with all the power which he as legislator thinks proper to give
himself. But, where the legislative and executive authority are in
distinct hands, the former will take care not to entrust the latter
with so large a power, as may tend to the subversion of it's own
independence, and therewith of the liberty of the subject. With us
therefore in England this supreme power is divided into two branches;
the one legislative, to wit, the parliament, consisting of king,
lords, and commons; the other executive, consisting of the king alone.
It will be the business of this chapter to consider the British
parliament; in which the legislative power, and (of course) the
supreme and absolute authority of the state, is vested by our
constitution.

THE original or first institution of parliaments is one of those
matters that lie so far hidden in the dark ages of antiquity, that the
tracing of it out is a thing equally difficult and uncertain. The
word, _parliament_, itself (or _colloquium_, as some of our historians
translate it) is comparatively of modern date, derived from the
French, and signifying the place where they met and conferred
together. It was first applied to general assemblies of the states
under Louis VII in France, about the middle of the twelfth century[a].
But it is certain that, long before the introduction of the Norman
language into England, all matters of importance were debated and
settled in the great councils of the realm. A practice, which seems to
have been universal among the northern nations, particularly the
Germans[b]; and carried by them into all the countries of Europe,
which they overran at the dissolution of the Roman empire. Relics of
which constitution, under various modifications and changes, are still
to be met with in the diets of Poland, Germany, and Sweden, and the
assembly of the estates in France; for what is there now called the
parliament is only the supreme court of justice, composed of judges
and advocates; which neither is in practice, nor is supposed to be in
theory, a general council of the realm.

[Footnote a: Mod. Un. Hist. xxiii. 307.]

[Footnote b: _De minoribus rebus principes consultant, de majoribus
omnes._ Tac. _de mor. Germ._ _c._ 11.]

WITH us in England this general council hath been held immemorially,
under the several names of _michel-synoth_, or great council,
_michel-gemote_ or great meeting, and more frequently _wittena-gemote_
or the meeting of wise men. It was also stiled in Latin, _commune
concilium regni_, _magnum concilium regis_, _curia magna_, _conventus
magnatum vel procerum_, _assisa generalis_, and sometimes _communitas
regni Angliae_[c]. We have instances of it's meeting to order the
affairs of the kingdom, to make new laws, and to amend the old, or, as
Fleta[d] expresses it, "_novis injuriis emersis nova constituere
remedia_," so early as the reign of Ina king of the west Saxons, Offa
king of the Mercians, and Ethelbert king of Kent, in the several
realms of the heptarchy. And, after their union, the mirrour[e]
informs us, that king Alfred ordained for a perpetual usage, that
these councils should meet twice in the year, or oftener, if need be,
to treat of the government of God's people; how they should keep
themselves from sin, should live in quiet, and should receive right.
Our succeeding Saxon and Danish monarchs held frequent councils of
this sort, as appears from their respective codes of laws; the titles
whereof usually speak them to be enacted, either by the king with the
advice of his wittena-gemote, or wise men, as, "_haec sunt instituta,
quae Edgarus rex consilio sapientum suorum instituit_;" or to be
enacted by those sages with the advice of the king, as, "_haec sunt
judicia, quae sapientes consilio regis Ethelstani instituerunt_;" or
lastly, to be enacted by them both together, as; "_hae sunt
institutiones, quas rex Edmundus et episcopi sui cum sapientibus suis
instituerunt_."

[Footnote c: Glanvil. _l._ 13 _c._ 32. _l._ 9. _c._ 10.--Pref. 9
Rep.--2 Inst. 526.]

[Footnote d: _l._ 2. _c._ 2.]

[Footnote e: c. 1. §. 3.]

THERE is also no doubt but these great councils were held regularly
under the first princes of the Norman line. Glanvil, who wrote in the
reign of Henry the second, speaking of the particular amount of an
amercement in the sheriff's court, says, it had never yet been
ascertained by the general assise, or assembly, but was left to the
custom of particular counties[f]. Here the general assise is spoken of
as a meeting well known, and it's statutes or decisions are put in a
manifest contradistinction to customs, or the common law. And in
Edward the third's time an act of parliament, made in the reign of
William the conqueror, was pleaded in the case of the abbey of St
Edmund's-bury, and judicially allowed by the court[g].

[Footnote f: _Quanta esse debeat per nullam assisam generalem
determinatum est, sed pro consuetudine singulorum comitatuum debetur._
_l._ 9. _c._ 10.]

[Footnote g: Year book, 21 Edw. III. 60.]

HENCE it indisputably appears, that parliaments, or general councils,
are coeval with the kingdom itself. How those parliaments were
constituted and composed, is another question, which has been matter
of great dispute among our learned antiquarians; and, particularly,
whether the commons were summoned at all; or, if summoned, at what
period they began to form a distinct assembly. But it is not my
intention here to enter into controversies of this sort. I hold it
sufficient that it is generally agreed, that in the main the
constitution of parliament, as it now stands, was marked out so long
ago as the seventeenth year of king John, _A.D._ 1215, in the great
charter granted by that prince; wherein he promises to summon all
arch-bishops, bishops, abbots, earls, and greater barons, personally;
and all other tenants in chief under the crown, by the sheriff and
bailiffs; to meet at a certain place, with forty days notice, to
assess aids and scutages when necessary. And this constitution has
subsisted in fact at least from the year 1266, 49 Hen. III: there
being still extant writs of that date, to summon knights, citizens,
and burgesses to parliament. I proceed therefore to enquire wherein
consists this constitution of parliament, as it now stands, and has
stood for the space of five hundred years. And in the prosecution of
this enquiry, I shall consider, first, the manner and time of it's
assembling: secondly, it's constituent parts: thirdly, the laws and
customs relating to parliament, considered as one aggregate body:
fourthly and fifthly, the laws and customs relating to each house,
separately and distinctly taken: sixthly, the methods of proceeding,
and of making statutes, in both houses: and lastly, the manner of the
parliament's adjournment, prorogation, and dissolution.

I. AS to the manner and time of assembling. The parliament is
regularly to be summoned by the king's writ or letter, issued out of
chancery by advice of the privy council, at least forty days before it
begins to sit. It is a branch of the royal prerogative, that no
parliament can be convened by it's own authority, or by the authority
of any, except the king alone. And this prerogative is founded upon
very good reason. For, supposing it had a right to meet spontaneously,
without being called together, it is impossible to conceive that all
the members, and each of the houses, would agree unanimously upon the
proper time and place of meeting: and if half of the members met, and
half absented themselves, who shall determine which is really the
legislative body, the part assembled, or that which stays away? It is
therefore necessary that the parliament should be called together at a
determinate time and place; and highly becoming it's dignity and
independence, that it should be called together by none but one of
it's own constituent parts; and, of the three constituent parts, this
office can only appertain to the king; as he is a single person, whose
will may be uniform and steady; the first person in the nation, being
superior to both houses in dignity; and the only branch of the
legislature that has a separate existence, and is capable of
performing any act at a time when no parliament is in being[h]. Nor is
it an exception to this rule that, by some modern statutes, on the
demise of a king or queen, if there be then no parliament in being,
the last parliament revives, and is to sit again for six months,
unless dissolved by the successor: for this revived parliament must
have been originally summoned by the crown.

[Footnote h: By motives somewhat similar to these the republic of
Venice was actuated, when towards the end of the seventh century it
abolished the tribunes of the people, who were annually chosen by the
several districts of the Venetian territory, and constituted a doge in
their stead; in whom the executive power of the state at present
resides. For which their historians have assigned these, as the
principal reasons. 1. The propriety of having the executive power a
part of the legislative, or senate; to which the former annual
magistrates were not admitted. 2. The necessity of having a single
person to convoke the great council when separated. Mod. Un. Hist.
xxvii. 15.]

IT is true, that by a statute, 16 Car. I. c. 1. it was enacted, that
if the king neglected to call a parliament for three years, the peers
might assemble and issue out writs for the choosing one; and, in case
of neglect of the peers, the constituents might meet and elect one
themselves. But this, if ever put in practice, would have been liable
to all the inconveniences I have just now stated; and the act itself
was esteemed so highly detrimental and injurious to the royal
prerogative, that it was repealed by statute 16 Car. II. c. 1. From
thence therefore no precedent can be drawn.

IT is also true, that the convention-parliament, which restored king
Charles the second, met above a month before his return; the lords by
their own authority, and the commons in pursuance of writs issued in
the name of the keepers of the liberty of England by authority of
parliament: and that the said parliament sat till the twenty ninth of
December, full seven months after the restoration; and enacted many
laws, several of which are still in force. But this was for the
necessity of the thing, which supersedes all law; for if they had not
so met, it was morally impossible that the kingdom should have been
settled in peace. And the first thing done after the king's return,
was to pass an act declaring this to be a good parliament,
notwithstanding the defect of the king's writs[i]. So that, as the
royal prerogative was chiefly wounded by their so meeting, and as the
king himself, who alone had a right to object, consented to wave the
objection, this cannot be drawn into an example in prejudice of the
rights of the crown. Besides we should also remember, that it was at
that time a great doubt among the lawyers[k], whether even this
healing act made it a good parliament; and held by very many in the
negative: though it seems to have been too nice a scruple.

[Footnote i: Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 1.]

[Footnote k: 1 Sid. 1.]

IT is likewise true, that at the time of the revolution, _A.D._ 1688,
the lords and commons by their own authority, and upon the summons of
the prince of Orange, (afterwards king William) met in a convention
and therein disposed of the crown and kingdom. But it must be
remembered, that this assembling was upon a like principle of
necessity as at the restoration; that is, upon an apprehension that
king James the second had abdicated the government, and that the
throne was thereby vacant: which apprehension of theirs was confirmed
by their concurrent resolution, when they actually came together. And
in such a case as the palpable vacancy of a throne, it follows _ex
necessitate rei_, that the form of the royal writs must be laid aside,
otherwise no parliament can ever meet again. For, let us put another
possible case, and suppose, for the sake of argument, that the whole
royal line should at any time fail, and become extinct, which would
indisputably vacate the throne: in this situation it seems reasonable
to presume, that the body of the nation, consisting of lords and
commons, would have a right to meet and settle the government;
otherwise there must be no government at all. And upon this and no
other principle did the convention in 1688 assemble. The vacancy of
the throne was precedent to their meeting without any royal summons,
not a consequence of it. They did not assemble without writ, and then
make the throne vacant; but the throne being previously vacant by the
king's abdication, they assembled without writ, as they must do if
they assembled at all. Had the throne been full, their meeting would
not have been regular; but, as it was really empty, such meeting
became absolutely necessary. And accordingly it is declared by statute
1 W. & M. st. 1. c. 1. that this convention was really the two houses
of parliament, notwithstanding the want of writs or other defects of
form. So that, notwithstanding these two capital exceptions, which
were justifiable only on a principle of necessity, (and each of which,
by the way, induced a revolution in the government) the rule laid down
is in general certain, that the king, only, can convoke a parliament.

AND this by the antient statutes of the realm[l], he is bound to do
every year, or oftener, if need be. Not that he is, or ever was,
obliged by these statutes to call a _new_ parliament every year; but
only to permit a parliament to sit annually for the redress of
grievances, and dispatch of business, _if need be_. These last words
are so loose and vague, that such of our monarchs as were enclined to
govern without parliaments, neglected the convoking them, sometimes
for a very considerable period, under pretence that there was no need
of them. But, to remedy this, by the statute 16 Car. II. c. 1. it is
enacted, that the sitting and holding of parliaments shall not be
intermitted above three years at the most. And by the statute 1 W. &
M. st. 2. c. 2. it is declared to be one of the rights of the people,
that for redress of all grievances, and for the amending,
strengthening, and preserving the laws, parliaments ought to be held
_frequently_. And this indefinite _frequency_ is again reduced to a
certainty by statute 6 W. & M. c. 2. which enacts, as the statute of
Charles the second had done before, that a new parliament shall be
called within three years[m] after the determination of the former.

[Footnote l: 4 Edw. III. c. 14. and 36 Edw. III. c. 10.]

[Footnote m: This is the same period, that is allowed in Sweden for
intermitting their general diets, or parliamentary assemblies. Mod.
Un. Hist. xxxiii. 15.]

II. THE constituent parts of a parliament are the next objects of our
enquiry. And these are, the king's majesty, sitting there in his royal
political capacity, and the three estates of the realm; the lords
spiritual, the lords temporal, (who sit, together with, the king, in
one house) and the commons, who sit by themselves in another[n]. And
the king and these three estates, together, form the great corporation
or body politic of the kingdom, of which the king is said to be
_caput, principium, et finis_. For upon their coming together the king
meets them, either in person or by representation; without which there
can be no beginning of a parliament[o]; and he also has alone the
power of dissolving them.

[Footnote n: 4 Inst. 1.]

[Footnote o: 4 Inst. 6.]

IT is highly necessary for preserving the ballance of the
constitution, that the executive power should be a branch, though not
the whole, of the legislature. The total union of them, we have seen,
would be productive of tyranny; the total disjunction of them for the
present, would in the end produce the same effects, by causing that
union, against which it seems to provide. The legislature would soon
become tyrannical, by making continual encroachments, and gradually
assuming to itself the rights of the executive power. Thus the long
parliament of Charles the first, while it acted in a constitutional
manner, with the royal concurrence, redressed many heavy grievances
and established many salutary laws. But when the two houses assumed
the power of legislation, in exclusion of the royal authority, they
soon after assumed likewise the reins of administration; and, in
consequence of these united powers, overturned both church and state,
and established a worse oppression than any they pretended to remedy.
To hinder therefore any such encroachments, the king is himself a part
of the parliament: and, as this is the reason of his being so, very
properly therefore the share of legislation, which the constitution
has placed in the crown, consists in the power of _rejecting_, rathar
[Transcriber's Note: rather] than _resolving_; this being sufficient
to answer the end proposed. For we may apply to the royal negative, in
this instance, what Cicero observes of the negative of the Roman
tribunes, that the crown has not any power of _doing_ wrong, but
merely of _preventing_ wrong from being done[p]. The crown cannot
begin of itself any alterations in the present established law; but it
may approve or disapprove of the alterations suggested and consented
to by the two houses. The legislative therefore cannot abridge the
executive power of any rights which it now has by law, without it's
own consent; since the law must perpetually stand as it now does,
unless all the powers will agree to alter it. And herein indeed
consists the true excellence of the English government, that all the
parts of it form a mutual check upon each other. In the legislature,
the people are a check upon the nobility, and the nobility a check
upon the people; by the mutual privilege of rejecting what the other
has resolved: while the king is a check upon both, which preserves the
executive power from encroachments. And this very executive power is
again checked, and kept within due bounds by the two houses, through
the privilege they have of enquiring into, impeaching, and punishing
the conduct (not indeed of the king, which would destroy his
constitutional independence; but, which is more beneficial to the
public) of his evil and pernicious counsellors. Thus every branch of
our civil polity supports and is supported, regulates and is
regulated, by the rest; for the two houses naturally drawing in two
directions of opposite interest, and the prerogative in another still
different from them both, they mutually keep each other from exceeding
their proper limits; while the whole is prevented from separation, and
artificially connected together by the mixed nature of the crown,
which is a part of the legislative, and the sole executive magistrate.
Like three distinct powers in mechanics, they jointly impel the
machine of government in a direction different from what either,
acting by themselves, would have done; but at the same time in a
direction partaking of each, and formed out of all; a direction which
constitutes the true line of the liberty and happiness of the
community.

[Footnote p: _Sulla--tribunis plebis sua lege injuriae faciendae
potestatem ademit, auxilii ferendi reliquit._ _de LL._ 3. 9.]

LET us now consider these constituent parts of the sovereign power, or
parliament, each in a separate view. The king's majesty will be the
subject of the next, and many subsequent chapters, to which we must at
present refer.

THE next in order are the spiritual lords. These consist of two
arch-bishops, and twenty four bishops; and, at the dissolution of
monasteries by Henry VIII, consisted likewise of twenty six mitred
abbots, and two priors[q]: a very considerable body, and in those
times equal in number to the temporal nobility[r]. All these hold, or
are supposed to hold, certain antient baronies under the king: for
William the conqueror thought proper to change the spiritual tenure,
of frankalmoign or free alms, under which the bishops held their lands
during the Saxon government, into the feodal or Norman tenure by
barony; which subjected their estates to all civil charges and
assessments, from which they were before exempt[s]: and, in right of
succession to those baronies, the bishops obtained their seat in the
house of lords[t]. But though these lords spiritual are in the eye of
the law a distinct estate from the lords temporal, and are so
distinguished in all our acts of parliament, yet in practice they are
usually blended together under the one name of _the lords_; they
intermix in their votes; and the majority of such intermixture binds
both estates. For if a bill should pass their house, there is no doubt
of it's being effectual, though every lord spiritual should vote
against it; of which Selden[u], and sir Edward Coke[w], give many
instances: as, on the other hand, I presume it would be equally good,
if the lords temporal present were inferior to the bishops in number,
and every one of those temporal lords gave his vote to reject the
bill; though this sir Edward Coke seems to doubt of[x].

[Footnote q: Seld. tit. hon. 2. 5. 27.]

[Footnote r: Co. Litt. 97.]

[Footnote s: Gilb. Hist. Exch. 55. Spelm. W.I. 291.]

[Footnote t: Glanv. 7. 1. Co. Litt. 97. Seld. tit. hon. 2. 5. 19.]

[Footnote u: Baronage. p. 1. c. 6.]

[Footnote w: 2 Inst. 585, 6, 7.]

[Footnote x: 4 Inst. 25.]

THE lords temporal consist of all the peers of the realm (the bishops
not being in strictness held to be such, but merely lords of
parliament[y]) by whatever title of nobility distinguished; dukes,
marquisses, earls, viscounts, or barons; of which dignities we shall
speak more hereafter. Some of these sit by descent, as do all antient
peers; some by creation, as do all new-made ones; others, since the
union with Scotland, by election, which is the case of the sixteen
peers, who represent the body of the Scots nobility. Their number is
indefinite, and may be encreased at will by the power of the crown:
and once, in the reign of queen Anne, there was an instance of
creating no less than twelve together; in contemplation of which, in
the reign of king George the first, a bill passed the house of lords,
and was countenanced by the then ministry, for limiting the number of
the peerage. This was thought by some to promise a great acquisition
to the constitution, by restraining the prerogative from gaining the
ascendant in that august assembly, by pouring in at pleasure an
unlimited number of new created lords. But the bill was ill-relished
and miscarried in the house of commons, whose leading members were
then desirous to keep the avenues to the other house as open and easy
as possible.

[Footnote y: Staunford. P.C. 153.]

THE distinction of rank and honours is necessary in every
well-governed state; in order to reward such as are eminent for their
services to the public, in a manner the most desirable to individuals,
and yet without burthen to the community; exciting thereby an
ambitious yet laudable ardor, and generous emulation in others. And
emulation, or virtuous ambition, is a spring of action which, however
dangerous or invidious in a mere republic or under a despotic sway,
will certainly be attended with good effects under a free monarchy;
where, without destroying it's existence, it's excesses may be
continually restrained by that superior power, from which all honour
is derived. Such a spirit, when nationally diffused, gives life and
vigour to the community; it sets all the wheels of government in
motion, which under a wise regulator, may be directed to any
beneficial purpose; and thereby every individual may be made
subservient to the public good, while he principally means to promote
his own particular views. A body of nobility is also more peculiarly
necessary in our mixed and compounded constitution, in order to
support the rights of both the crown and the people, by forming a
barrier to withstand the encroachments of both. It creates and
preserves that gradual scale of dignity, which proceeds from the
peasant to the prince; rising like a pyramid from a broad foundation,
and diminishing to a point as it rises. It is this ascending and
contracting proportion that adds stability to any government; for when
the departure is sudden from one extreme to another, we may pronounce
that state to be precarious. The nobility therefore are the pillars,
which are reared from among the people, more immediately to support
the throne; and if that falls, they must also be buried under it's
ruins. Accordingly, when in the last century the commons had
determined to extirpate monarchy, they also voted the house of lords
to be useless and dangerous. And since titles of nobility are thus
expedient in the state, it is also expedient that their owners should
form an independent and separate branch of the legislature. If they
were confounded with the mass of the people, and like them had only a
vote in electing representatives, their privileges would soon be borne
down and overwhelmed by the popular torrent, which would effectually
level all distinctions. It is therefore highly necessary that the body
of nobles should have a distinct assembly, distinct deliberations, and
distinct powers from the commons.

THE commons consist of all such men of any property in the kingdom as
have not seats in the house of lords; every one of which has a voice
in parliament, either personally, or by his representatives. In a free
state, every man, who is supposed a free agent, ought to be, in some
measure, his own governor; and therefore a branch at least of the
legislative power should reside in the whole body of the people. And
this power, when the territories of the state are small and it's
citizens easily known, should be exercised by the people in their
aggregate or collective capacity, as was wisely ordained in the petty
republics of Greece, and the first rudiments of the Roman state. But
this will be highly inconvenient, when the public territory is
extended to any considerable degree, and the number of citizens is
encreased. Thus when, after the social war, all the burghers of Italy
were admitted free citizens of Rome, and each had a vote in the public
assemblies, it became impossible to distinguish the spurious from the
real voter, and from that time all elections and popular deliberations
grew tumultuous and disorderly; which paved the way for Marius and
Sylla, Pompey and Caesar, to trample on the liberties of their
country, and at last to dissolve the commonwealth. In so large a state
as ours it is therefore very wisely contrived, that the people should
do that by their representatives, which it is impracticable to perform
in person: representatives, chosen by a number of minute and separate
districts, wherein all the voters are, or easily may be,
distinguished. The counties are therefore represented by knights,
elected by the proprietors of lands; the cities and boroughs are
represented by citizens and burgesses, chosen by the mercantile part
or supposed trading interest of the nation; much in the same manner as
the burghers in the diet of Sweden are chosen by the corporate towns,
Stockholm sending four, as London does with us, other cities two, and
some only one[z]. The number of English representatives is 513, and of
Scots 45; in all 558. And every member, though chosen by one
particular district, when elected and returned serves for the whole
realm. For the end of his coming thither is not particular, but
general; not barely to advantage his constituents, but the _common_
wealth; to advise his majesty (as appears from the writ of summons[a])
"_de communi consilio super negotiis quibusdam arduis et urgentibus,
regem, statum et defensionem regni Angliae et ecclesiae Anglicanae
concernentibus_." And therefore he is not bound, like a deputy in the
united provinces, to consult with, or take the advice, of his
constituents upon any particular point, unless he himself thinks it
proper or prudent so to do.

[Footnote z: Mod. Un. Hist. xxxiii. 18.]

[Footnote a: 4 Inst. 14.]

THESE are the constituent parts of a parliament, the king, the lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons. Parts, of which each is so
necessary, that the consent of all three is required to make any new
law that shall bind the subject. Whatever is enacted for law by one,
or by two only, of the three is no statute; and to it no regard is
due, unless in matters relating to their own privileges. For though,
in the times of madness and anarchy, the commons once passed a
vote[b], "that whatever is enacted or declared for law by the commons
in parliament assembled hath the force of law; and all the people of
this nation are concluded thereby, although the consent and
concurrence of the king or house of peers be not had thereto;" yet,
when the constitution was restored in all it's forms, it was
particularly enacted by statute 13 Car. II. c. 1. that if any person
shall maliciously or advisedly affirm, that both or either of the
houses of parliament have any legislative authority without the king,
such person shall incur all the penalties of a praemunire.

[Footnote b: 4 Jan. 1648.]

III. WE are next to examine the laws and customs relating to
parliament, thus united together and considered as one aggregate body.

THE power and jurisdiction of parliament, says sir Edward Coke[c], is
so transcendent and absolute, that it cannot be confined, either for
causes or persons, within any bounds. And of this high court he adds,
it may be truly said "_si antiquitatem spectes, est vetustissima; si
dignitatem, est honoratissima; si juridictionem, est capacissima_." It
hath sovereign and uncontrolable authority in making, confirming,
enlarging, restraining, abrogating, repealing, reviving, and
expounding of laws, concerning matters of all possible denominations,
ecclesiastical, or temporal, civil, military, maritime, or criminal:
this being the place where that absolute despotic power, which must in
all governments reside somewhere, is entrusted by the constitution of
these kingdoms. All mischiefs and grievances, operations and remedies,
that transcend the ordinary course of the laws, are within the reach
of this extraordinary tribunal. It can regulate or new model the
succession to the crown; as was done in the reign of Henry VIII and
William III. It can alter the established religion of the land; as was
done in a variety of instances, in the reigns of king Henry VIII and
his three children. It can change and create afresh even the
constitution of the kingdom and of parliaments themselves; as was done
by the act of union, and the several statutes for triennial and
septennial elections. It can, in short, do every thing that is not
naturally impossible; and therefore some have not scrupled to call
it's power, by a figure rather too bold, the omnipotence of
parliament. True it is, that what they do, no authority upon earth can
undo. So that it is a matter most essential to the liberties of this
kingdom, that such members be delegated to this important trust, as
are most eminent for their probity, their fortitude, and their
knowlege; for it was a known apothegm of the great lord treasurer
Burleigh, "that England could never be ruined but by a parliament:"
and, as sir Matthew Hale observes[d], this being the highest and
greatest court, over which none other can have jurisdiction in the
kingdom, if by any means a misgovernment should any way fall upon it,
the subjects of this kingdom are left without all manner of remedy. To
the same purpose the president Montesquieu, though I trust too
hastily, presages[e]; that as Rome, Sparta, and Carthage have lost
their liberty and perished, so the constitution of England will in
time lose it's liberty, will perish: it will perish, whenever the
legislative power shall become more corrupt than the executive.

[Footnote c: 4 Inst. 36.]

[Footnote d: of parliaments, 49.]

[Footnote e: Sp. L. 11. 6.]

IT must be owned that Mr Locke[f], and other theoretical writers, have
held, that "there remains still inherent in the people a supreme power
to remove or alter the legislative, when they find the legislative act
contrary to the trust reposed in them: for when such trust is abused,
it is thereby forfeited, and devolves to those who gave it." But
however just this conclusion may be in theory, we cannot adopt it, nor
argue from it, under any dispensation of government at present
actually existing. For this devolution of power, to the people at
large, includes in it a dissolution of the whole form of government
established by that people, reduces all the members to their original
state of equality, and by annihilating the sovereign power repeals all
positive laws whatsoever before enacted. No human laws will therefore
suppose a case, which at once must destroy all law, and compel men to
build afresh upon a new foundation; nor will they make provision for
so desperate an event, as must render all legal provisions
ineffectual. So long therefore as the English constitution lasts, we
may venture to affirm, that the power of parliament is absolute and
without control.

[Footnote f: on Gov. p. 2. §. 149, 227.]

IN order to prevent the mischiefs that might arise, by placing this
extensive authority in hands that are either incapable, or else
improper, to manage it, it is provided that no one shall sit or vote
in either house of parliament, unless he be twenty one years of age.
This is expressly declared by statute 7 & 8 W. III. c. 25. with regard
to the house of commons; though a minor was incapacitated before from
sitting in either house, by the law and custom of parliament[g]. To
prevent crude innovations in religion and government, it is enacted by
statute 30 Car. II. st. 2. and 1 Geo. I. c. 13. that no member shall
vote or sit in either house, till he hath in the presence of the house
taken the oaths of allegiance, supremacy, and abjuration, and
subscribed and repeated the declaration against transubstantiation,
and invocation of saints, and the sacrifice of the mass. To prevent
dangers that may arise to the kingdom from foreign attachments,
connexions, or dependencies, it is enacted by the 12 & 13 W. III. c.
2. that no alien, born out of the dominions of the crown of Great
Britain, even though he be naturalized, shall be capable of being a
member of either house of parliament.

[Footnote g: 4 Inst. 47.]

FARTHER: as every court of justice hath laws and customs for it's
direction, some the civil and canon, some the common law, others their
own peculiar laws and customs, so the high court of parliament hath
also it's own peculiar law, called the _lex et consuetudo
parliamenti_; a law which sir Edward Coke[h] observes, is "_ab omnibus
quaerenda, a multis ignorata, a paucis cognita_." It will not
therefore be expected that we should enter into the examination of
this law, with any degree of minuteness; since, as the same learned
author assures us[i], it is much better to be learned out of the rolls
of parliament, and other records, and by precedents, and continual
experience, than can be expressed by any one man. It will be
sufficient to observe, that the whole of the law and custom of
parliament has it's original from this one maxim; "that whatever
matter arises concerning either house of parliament, ought to be
examined, discussed, and adjudged in that house to which it relates,
and not elsewhere." Hence, for instance, the lords will not suffer
the commons to interfere in settling a claim of peerage; the commons
will not allow the lords to judge of the election of a burgess; nor
will either house permit the courts of law to examine the merits of
either case. But the maxims upon which they proceed, together with
their method of proceeding, rest entirely in the breast of the
parliament itself; and are not defined and ascertained by any
particular stated laws.

[Footnote h: 1 Inst. 11.]

[Footnote i: 4 Inst. 50.]

THE _privileges_ of parliament are likewise very large and indefinite;
which has occasioned an observation, that the principal privilege of
parliament consisted in this, that it's privileges were not certainly
known to any but the parliament itself. And therefore when in 31 Hen.
VI the house of lords propounded a question to the judges touching the
privilege of parliament, the chief justice, in the name of his
brethren, declared, "that they ought not to make answer to that
question; for it hath not been used aforetime that the justices should
in any wise determine the privileges of the high court of parliament;
for it is so high and mighty in his nature, that it may make law; and
that which is law, it may make no law; and the determination and
knowlege of that privilege belongs to the lords of parliament, and not
to the justices[k]." [Transcriber's Note: missing end quotation mark
added] Privilege of parliament was principally established, in order
to protect it's members not only from being molested by their
fellow-subjects, but also more especially from being oppressed by the
power of the crown. If therefore all the privileges of parliament were
once to be set down and ascertained, and no privilege to be allowed
but what was so defined and determined, it were easy for the executive
power to devise some new case, not within the line of privilege, and
under pretence thereof to harass any refractory member and violate the
freedom of parliament. The dignity and independence of the two houses
are therefore in great measure preserved by keeping their privileges
indefinite. Some however of the more notorious privileges of the
members of either house are, privilege of speech, of person, of their
domestics, and of their lands and goods. As to the first, privilege of
speech, it is declared by the statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. as one of
the liberties of the people, "that the freedom of speech, and debates,
and proceedings in parliament, ought not to be impeached or questioned
in any court or place out of parliament." And this freedom of speech
is particularly demanded of the king in person, by the speaker of the
house of commons, at the opening of every new parliament. So likewise
are the other privileges, of person, servants, lands and goods; which
are immunities as antient as Edward the confessor, in whose laws[l] we
find this precept. "_Ad synodos venientibus, sive summoniti sint, sive
per se quid agendum habuerint, sit summa pax_:" and so too, in the old
Gothic constitutions, "_extenditur haec pax et securitas ad
quatuordecim dies, convocato regni senatu_[m]." This includes not only
privilege from illegal violence, but also from legal arrests, and
seisures by process from the courts of law. To assault by violence a
member of either house, or his menial servants, is a high contempt of
parliament, and there punished with the utmost severity. It has
likewise peculiar penalties annexed to it in the courts of law, by the
statutes 5 Hen. IV. c. 6. and 11 Hen. VI. c. 11. Neither can any
member of either house be arrested and taken into custody, nor served
with any process of the courts of law; nor can his menial servants be
arrested; nor can any entry be made on his lands; nor can his goods be
distrained or seised; without a breach of the privilege of parliament.
These privileges however, which derogate from the common law, being
only indulged to prevent the member's being diverted from the public
business, endure no longer than the session of parliament, save only
as to the freedom of his person: which in a peer is for ever sacred
and inviolable; and in a commoner for forty days after every
prorogation, and forty days before the next appointed meeting[n];
which is now in effect as long as the parliament subsists, it seldom
being prorogued for more than fourscore days at a time. But this
privilege of person does not hold in crimes of such public malignity
as treason, felony, or breach of the peace[o]; or rather perhaps in
such crimes for which surety of the peace may be required. As to all
other privileges which obstruct the ordinary course of justice, they
cease by the statutes 12 W. III. c. 3. and 11 Geo. II. c. 24.
immediately after the dissolution or prorogation of the parliament, or
adjournment of the houses for above a fortnight; and during these
recesses a peer, or member of the house of commons, may be sued like
an ordinary subject, and in consequence of such suits may be
dispossessed of his lands and goods. In these cases the king has also
his prerogative: he may sue for his debts, though not arrest the
person of a member, during the sitting of parliament; and by statute 2
& 3 Ann. c. 18. a member may be sued during the sitting of parliament
for any misdemesnor or breach of trust in a public office. Likewise,
for the benefit of commerce, it is provided by statute 4 Geo. III. c.
33, that any trader, having privilege of parliament, may be served
with legal process for any just debt, (to the amount of 100_l._) and
unless he makes satisfaction within two months, it shall be deemed an
act of bankruptcy; and that commissions of bankrupt may be issued
against such privileged traders, in like manner as against any other.

[Footnote k: Seld. Baronage. part. 1. c. 4.]

[Footnote l: _cap._ 3.]

[Footnote m: Stiernh. _de jure Goth._ _l._ 3. _c._ 3.]

[Footnote n: 2 Lev. 72.]

[Footnote o: 4 Inst. 25.]

THESE are the general heads of the laws and customs relating to
parliament, considered as one aggregate body. We will next proceed to

IV. THE laws and customs relating to the house of lords in particular.
These, if we exclude their judicial capacity, which will be more
properly treated of in the third and fourth books of these
commentaries, will take up but little of our time.

ONE very antient privilege is that declared by the charter of the
forest[p], confirmed in parliament 9 Hen. III; viz. that every lord
spiritual or temporal summoned to parliament, and passing through the
king's forests, may, both in going and returning, kill one or two of
the king's deer without warrant; in view of the forester, if he be
present; or on blowing a horn if he be absent, that he may not seem to
take the king's venison by stealth.

[Footnote p: cap. 11.]

IN the next place they have a right to be attended, and constantly
are, by the judges of the court of king's bench and commonpleas, and
such of the barons of the exchequer as are of the degree of the coif,
or have been made serjeants at law; as likewise by the masters of the
court of chancery; for their advice in point of law, and for the
greater dignity of their proceedings. The secretaries of state, the
attorney and solicitor general, and the rest of the king's learned
counsel being serjeants, were also used to attend the house of peers,
and have to this day their regular writs of summons issued out at the
beginning of every parliament[q]: but, as many of them have of late
years been members of the house of commons, their attendance is fallen
into disuse.

[Footnote q: Stat. 31 Hen. VIII. c. 10. Smith's commonw. b. 2. c. 3.
Moor. 551. 4 Inst. 4. Hale of parl. 140.]

ANOTHER privilege is, that every peer, by licence obtained from the
king, may make another lord of parliament his proxy, to vote for him
in his absence[r]. A privilege which a member of the other house can
by no means have, as he is himself but a proxy for a multitude of
other people[s].

[Footnote r: Seld. baronage. p. 1. c. 1.]

[Footnote s: 4 Inst. 12.]

EACH peer has also a right, by leave of the house, when a vote passes
contrary to his sentiments, to enter his dissent on the journals of
the house, with the reasons for such dissent; which is usually stiled
his protest.

ALL bills likewise, that may in their consequences any way affect the
rights of the peerage, are by the custom of parliament to have their
first rise and beginning in the house of peers, and to suffer no
changes or amendments in the house of commons.

THERE is also one statute peculiarly relative to the house of lords; 6
Ann. c. 23. which regulates the election of the sixteen representative
peers of North Britain, in consequence of the twenty second and twenty
third articles of the union: and for that purpose prescribes the
oaths, &c, to be taken by the electors; directs the mode of balloting;
prohibits the peers electing from being attended in an unusual manner;
and expressly provides, that no other matter shall be treated of in
that assembly, save only the election, on pain of incurring a
praemunire.

V. THE peculiar laws and customs of the house of commons relate
principally to the raising of taxes, and the elections of members to
serve in parliament.

FIRST, with regard to taxes: it is the antient indisputable privilege
and right of the house of commons, that all grants of subsidies or
parliamentary aids do begin in their house, and are first bestowed by
them[t]; although their grants are not effectual to all intents and
purposes, until they have the assent of the other two branches of the
legislature. The general reason, given for this exclusive privilege of
the house of commons, is, that the supplies are raised upon the body
of the people, and therefore it is proper that they alone should have
the right of taxing themselves. This reason would be unanswerable, if
the commons taxed none but themselves: but it is notorious, that a
very large share of property is in the possession of the house of
lords; that this property is equally taxable, and taxed, as the
property of the commons; and therefore the commons not being the
_sole_ persons taxed, this cannot be the reason of their having the
_sole_ right of raising and modelling the supply. The true reason,
arising from the spirit of our constitution, seems to be this. The
lords being a permanent hereditary body, created at pleasure by the
king, are supposed more liable to be influenced by the crown, and when
once influenced to continue so, than the commons, who are a temporary
elective body, freely nominated by the people. It would therefore be
extremely dangerous, to give them any power of framing new taxes for
the subject: it is sufficient, that they have a power of rejecting, if
they think the commons too lavish or improvident in their grants. But
so reasonably jealous are the commons of this valuable privilege, that
herein they will not suffer the other house to exert any power but
that of rejecting; they will not permit the least alteration or
amendment to be made by the lords to the mode of taxing the people by
a money bill; under which appellation are included all bills, by which
money is directed to be raised upon the subject, for any purpose or in
any shape whatsoever; either for the exigencies of government, and
collected from the kingdom in general, as the land tax; or for private
benefit, and collected in any particular district; as by turnpikes,
parish rates, and the like. Yet sir Matthew Hale[u] mentions one case,
founded on the practice of parliament in the reign of Henry VI[w],
wherein he thinks the lords may alter a money bill; and that is, if
the commons grant a tax, as that of tonnage and poundage, for _four_
years; and the lords alter it to a less time, as for _two_ years;
here, he says, the bill need not be sent back to the commons for their
concurrence, but may receive the royal assent without farther
ceremony; for the alteration of the lords is consistent with the grant
of the commons. But such an experiment will hardly be repeated by the
lords, under the present improved idea of the privilege of the house
of commons: and, in any case where a money bill is remanded to the
commons, all amendments in the mode of taxation are sure to be
rejected.

[Footnote t: 4 Inst. 29.]

[Footnote u: on parliaments, 65, 66.]

[Footnote w: Year book, 33 Hen. VI. 17.]

NEXT, with regard to the elections of knights, citizens, and
burgesses; we may observe that herein consists the exercise of the
democratical part of our constitution: for in a democracy there can be
no exercise of sovereignty but by suffrage, which is the declaration
of the people's will. In all democracies therefore it is of the utmost
importance to regulate by whom, and in what manner, the suffrages are
to be given. And the Athenians were so justly jealous of this
prerogative, that a stranger, who interfered in the assemblies of the
people, was punished by their laws with death: because such a man was
esteemed guilty of high treason, by usurping those rights of
sovereignty, to which he had no title. In England, where the people do
not debate in a collective body but by representation, the exercise of
this sovereignty consists in the choice of representatives. The laws
have therefore very strictly guarded against usurpation or abuse of
this power, by many salutary provisions; which may be reduced to these
three points, 1. The qualifications of the electors. 2. The
qualifications of the elected. 3. The proceedings at elections.

1. AS to the qualifications of the electors. The true reason of
requiring any qualification, with regard to property, in voters, is to
exclude such persons as are in so mean a situation that they are
esteemed to have no will of their own. If these persons had votes,
they would be tempted to dispose of them under some undue influence or
other. This would give a great, an artful, or a wealthy man, a larger
share in elections than is consistent with general liberty. If it were
probable that every man would give his vote freely, and without
influence of any kind, then, upon the true theory and genuine
principles of liberty, every member of the community, however poor,
should have a vote in electing those delegates, to whose charge is
committed the disposal of his property, his liberty, and his life.
But, since that can hardly be expected in persons of indigent
fortunes, or such as are under the immediate dominion of others, all
popular states have been obliged to establish certain qualifications;
whereby some, who are suspected to have no will of their own, are
excluded from voting, in order to set other individuals, whose wills
may be supposed independent, more thoroughly upon a level with each
other.

AND this constitution of suffrages is framed upon a wiser principle
than either of the methods of voting, by centuries, or by tribes,
among the Romans. In the method by centuries, instituted by Servius
Tullius, it was principally property, and not numbers that turned the
scale: in the method by tribes, gradually introduced by the tribunes
of the people, numbers only were regarded and property entirely
overlooked. Hence the laws passed by the former method had usually too
great a tendency to aggrandize the patricians or rich nobles; and
those by the latter had too much of a levelling principle. Our
constitution steers between the two extremes. Only such as are
entirely excluded, as can have no will of their own: there is hardly a
free agent to be found, but what is entitled to a vote in some place
or other in the kingdom. Nor is comparative wealth, or property,
entirely disregarded in elections; for though the richest man has only
one vote at one place, yet if his property be at all diffused, he has
probably a right to vote at more places than one, and therefore has
many representatives. This is the spirit of our constitution: not that
I assert it is in fact quite so perfect as I have here endeavoured to
describe it; for, if any alteration might be wished or suggested in
the present frame of parliaments, it should be in favour of a more
complete representation of the people.

BUT to return to our qualifications; and first those of electors for
knights of the shire. 1. By statute 8 Hen. VI. c. 7. and 10 Hen. VI.
c. 2. The knights of the shires shall be chosen of people dwelling in
the same counties; whereof every man shall have freehold to the value
of forty shillings by the year within the county; which by subsequent
statutes is to be clear of all charges and deductions, except
parliamentary and parochial taxes. The knights of shires are the
representatives of the landholders, or landed interest, of the
kingdom: their electors must therefore have estates in lands or
tenements, within the county represented: these estates must be
freehold, that is, for term of life at least; because beneficial
leases for long terms of years were not in use at the making of these
statutes, and copyholders were then little better than villeins,
absolutely dependent upon their lord: this freehold must be of forty
shillings annual value; because that sum would then, with proper
industry, furnish all the necessaries of life, and render the
freeholder, if he pleased, an independent man. For bishop Fleetwood,
in his _chronicon pretiosum_ written about sixty years since, has
fully proved forty shillings in the reign of Henry VI to have been
equal to twelve pounds _per annum_ in the reign of queen Anne; and, as
the value of money is very considerably lowered since the bishop
wrote, I think we may fairly conclude, from this and other
circumstances, that what was equivalent to twelve pounds in his days
is equivalent to twenty at present. The other less important
qualifications of the electors for counties in England and Wales may
be collected from the statutes cited in the margin[x]; which direct,
2. That no person under twenty one years of age shall be capable of
voting for any member. This extends to all sorts of members, as well
for boroughs as counties; as does also the next, viz. 3. That no
person convicted of perjury, or subornation of perjury, shall be
capable of voting in any election. 4. That no person shall vote in
right of any freehold, granted to him fraudulently to qualify him to
vote. Fraudulent grants are such as contain an agreement to reconvey,
or to defeat the estate granted; which agreements are made void, and
the estate is absolutely vested in the person to whom it is so
granted. And, to guard the better against such frauds, it is farther
provided, 5. That every voter shall have been in the actual
possession, or receipt of the profits, of his freehold to his own use
for twelve calendar months before; except it came to him by descent,
marriage, marriage settlement, will, or promotion to a benefice or
office. 6. That no person shall vote in respect of an annuity or
rentcharge, unless registered with the clerk of the peace twelve
calendar months before. 7. That in mortgaged or trust-estates, the
person in possession, under the abovementioned restrictions, shall
have the vote. 8. That only one person shall be admitted to vote for
any one house or tenement, to prevent the splitting of freeholds. 9.
That no estate shall qualify a voter, unless the estate has been
assessed to some land tax aid, at least twelve months before the
election. 10. That no tenant by copy of court roll shall be permitted
to vote as a freeholder. Thus much for the electors in counties.

[Footnote x: 7 & 8 W. III. c. 25. 10 Ann. c. 23. 2 Geo. II. c. 21. 18
Geo. II. c. 18. 31 Geo. II. c. 14. 3 Geo. III. c. 24.]

AS for the electors of citizens and burgesses, these are supposed to
be the mercantile part or trading interest of this kingdom. But as
trade is of a fluctuating nature, and seldom long fixed in a place, it
was formerly left to the crown to summon, _pro re nata_, the most
flourishing towns to send representatives to parliament. So that as
towns encreased in trade, and grew populous, they were admitted to a
share in the legislature. But the misfortune is, that the deserted
boroughs continued to be summoned, as well as those to whom their
trade and inhabitants were transferred; except a few which petitioned
to be eased of the expence, then usual, of maintaining their members:
four shillings a day being allowed for a knight of the shire, and two
shillings for a citizen or burgess; which was the rate of wages
established in the reign of Edward III[y]. Hence the members for
boroughs now bear above a quadruple proportion to those for counties,
and the number of parliament men is increased since Fortescue's time,
in the reign of Henry the sixth, from 300 to upwards of 500, exclusive
of those for Scotland. The universities were in general not empowered
to send burgesses to parliament; though once, in 28 Edw. I. when a
parliament was summoned to consider of the king's right to Scotland,
there were issued writs, which required the university of Oxford to
send up four or five, and that of Cambridge two or three, of their
most discreet and learned lawyers for that purpose[z]. But it was king
James the first, who indulged them with the permanent privilege to
send constantly two of their own body; to serve for those students
who, though useful members of the community, were neither concerned in
the landed nor the trading interest; and to protect in the legislature
the rights of the republic of letters. The right of election in
boroughs is various, depending intirely on the several charters,
customs, and constitutions of the respective places, which has
occasioned infinite disputes; though now by statute 2 Geo. II. c. 24.
the right of voting for the future shall be allowed according to the
last determination of the house of commons concerning it. And by
statute 3 Geo. III. c. 15. no freeman of any city or borough (other
than such as claim by birth, marriage, or servitude) shall be intitled
to vote therein unless he hath been admitted to his freedom twelve
calendar months before.

[Footnote y: 4 Inst. 16.]

[Footnote z: Prynne parl. writs. I. 345.]

2. OUR second point is the qualification of persons to be elected
members of the house of commons. This depends upon the law and custom
of parliaments[a], and the statutes referred to in the margin[b]. And
from these it appears, 1. That they must not be aliens born, or
minors. 2. That they must not be any of the twelve judges, because
they sit in the lords' house; nor of the clergy, for they sit in the
convocation; nor persons attainted of treason or felony, for they are
unfit to sit any where[c]. 3. That sheriffs of counties, and mayors
and bailiffs of boroughs, are not eligible in their respective
jurisdictions, as being returning officers[d]; but that sheriffs of
one county are eligible to be knights of another[e]. 4. That, in
strictness, all members ought to be inhabitants of the places for
which they are chosen: but this is intirely disregarded. 5. That no
persons concerned in the management of any duties or taxes created
since 1692, except the commissioners of the treasury, nor any of the
officers following, (viz. commissioners of prizes, transports, sick
and wounded, wine licences, navy, and victualling; secretaries or
receivers of prizes; comptrollers of the army accounts; agents for
regiments; governors of plantations and their deputies; officers of
Minorca or Gibraltar; officers of the excise and customs; clerks or
deputies in the several offices of the treasury, exchequer, navy,
victualling, admiralty, pay of the army or navy, secretaries of state,
salt, stamps, appeals, wine licences, hackney coaches, hawkers and
pedlars) nor any persons that hold any new office under the crown
created since 1705, are capable of being elected members. 6. That no
person having a pension under the crown during pleasure, or for any
term of years, is capable of being elected. 7. That if any member
accepts an office under the crown, except an officer in the army or
navy accepting a new commission, his seat is void; but such member is
capable of being re-elected. 8. That all knights of the shire shall be
actual knights, or such notable esquires and gentlemen, as have
estates sufficient to be knights, and by no means of the degree of
yeomen. This is reduced to a still greater certainty, by ordaining, 9.
That every knight of a shire shall have a clear estate of freehold or
copyhold to the value of six hundred pounds _per annum_, and every
citizen and burgess to the value of three hundred pounds; except the
eldest sons of peers, and of persons qualified to be knights of
shires, and except the members for the two universities: which
somewhat ballances the ascendant which the boroughs have gained over
the counties, by obliging the trading interest to make choice of
landed men: and of this qualification the member must make oath, and
give in the particulars in writing, at the time of his taking his
seat. But, subject to these restrictions and disqualifications, every
subject of the realm is eligible of common right. It was therefore an
unconstitutional prohibition, which was inserted in the king's writs,
for the parliament holden at Coventry, 6 Hen. IV, that no apprentice
or other man of the law should be elected a knight of the shire
therein[f]: in return for which, our law books and historians[g] have
branded this parliament with the name of _parliamentum indoctum_, or
the lack-learning parliament; and sir Edward Coke observes with some
spleen[h], that there was never a good law made thereat.

[Footnote a: 4 Inst. 47.]

[Footnote b: 1 Hen. V. c. 1. 23 Hen. VI. c. 15. 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2.
5 & 6 W. & M. c. 7. 11 & 12 W. III. c. 2. 12 & 13 W. III. c. 10. 6
Ann. c. 7. 9 Ann. c. 5. 1 Geo. I. c. 56. 15 Geo. II. c. 22. 33 Geo.
II. c. 20.]

[Footnote c: 4 Inst. 47.]

[Footnote d: Hale of parl. 114.]

[Footnote e: 4 Inst. 48.]

[Footnote f: Pryn. on 4 Inst. 13.]

[Footnote g: Walsingh. _A.D._ 1405.]

[Footnote h: 4 Inst. 48.]

3. THE third point regarding elections, is the method of proceeding
therein. This is also regulated by the law of parliament, and the
several statutes referred to in the margin[i]; all which I shall
endeavour to blend together, and extract out of them a summary account
of the method of proceeding to elections.

[Footnote i: 7 Hen. IV. c. 15. 8 Hen. VI. c. 7. 23 Hen. VI. c. 15. 1
W. & M. st. 1. c. 2. 2 W. & M. st. 1. c. 7. 5 & 6 W. & M. c. 20. 7 W.
III. c. 4. 7 & 8 W. III. c. 7. and c. 25. 10 & 11 W. III. c. 7. 12 &
13 W. III. c. 10. 6 Ann. c. 23. 9 Ann. c. 5. 10 Ann. c. 19. and c. 23.
2 Geo. II. c. 24. 8 Geo. II. c. 30. 18 Geo. II. c. 18. 19 Geo. II. c.
28.]

AS soon as the parliament is summoned, the lord chancellor, (or if a
vacancy happens during parliament, the speaker, by order of the house)
sends his warrant to the clerk of the crown in chancery; who thereupon
issues out writs to the sheriff of every county, for the election of
all the members to serve for that county, and every city and borough
therein. Within three days after the receipt of this writ, the sheriff
is to send his precept, under his seal, to the proper returning
officers of the cities and boroughs, commanding them to elect their
members; and the said returning officers are to proceed to election
within eight days from the receipt of the precept, giving four days
notice of the same; and to return the persons chosen, together with
the precept, to the sheriff.

BUT elections of knights of the shire must be proceeded to by the
sheriffs themselves in person, at the next county court that shall
happen after the delivery of the writ. The county court is a court
held every month or oftener by the sheriff, intended to try little
causes not exceeding the value of forty shillings, in what part of the
county he pleases to appoint for that purpose: but for the election of
knights of the shire, it must be held at the most usual place. If the
county court falls upon the day of delivering the writ, or within six
days after, the sheriff may adjourn the court and election to some
other convenient time, not longer than sixteen days, nor shorter than
ten; but he cannot alter the place, without the consent of all the
candidates; and in all such cases ten days public notice must be given
of the time and place of the election.

AND, as it is essential to the very being of parliament that elections
should be absolutely free, therefore all undue influences upon the
electors are illegal, and strongly prohibited. For Mr Locke[k] ranks
it among those breaches of trust in the executive magistrate, which
according to his notions amount to a dissolution of the government,
"if he employs the force, treasure, and offices of the society to
corrupt the representatives, or openly to preingage the electors, and
prescribe what manner of persons shall be chosen. For thus to regulate
candidates and electors, and new model the ways of election, what is
it, says he, but to cut up the government by the roots, and poison the
very fountain of public security?" As soon therefore as the time and
place of election, either in counties or boroughs, are fixed, all
soldiers quartered in the place are to remove, at least one day before
the election, to the distance of two miles or more; and not return
till one day after the poll is ended. Riots likewise have been
frequently determined to make an election void. By vote also of the
house of commons, to whom alone belongs the power of determining
contested elections, no lord of parliament, or lord lieutenant of a
county, hath any right to interfere in the election of commoners; and,
by statute, the lord warden of the cinque ports shall not recommend
any members there. If any officer of the excise, customs, stamps, or
certain other branches of the revenue, presumes to intermeddle in
elections, by persuading any voter or dissuading him, he forfeits
100_l_, and is disabled to hold any office.

[Footnote k: on Gov. part. 2. §. 222.]

THUS are the electors of one branch of the legislature secured from
any undue influence from either of the other two, and from all
external violence and compulsion. But the greatest danger is that in
which themselves co-operate, by the infamous practice of bribery and
corruption. To prevent which it is enacted that no candidate shall,
after the date (usually called the _teste_) of the writs, or after the
vacancy, give any money or entertainment to his electors, or promise
to give any, either to particular persons, or to the place in general,
in order to his being elected; on pain of being incapable to serve for
that place in parliament. And if any money, gift, office, employment,
or reward be given or promised to be given to any voter, at any time,
in order to influence him to give or withhold his vote, both he that
takes and he that offers such bribe forfeits 500_l_, and is for ever
disabled from voting and holding any office in any corporation;
unless, before conviction, he will discover some other offender of the
same kind, and then he is indemnified for his own offence[l]. The
first instance that occurs of election bribery, was so early as 13
Eliz. when one Thomas Longe (being a simple man and of small capacity
to serve in parliament) acknowleged that he had given the returning
officer and others of the borough of Westbury four pounds to be
returned member, and was for that premium elected. But for this
offence the borough was amerced, the member was removed, and the
officer fined and imprisoned[m]. But, as this practice hath since
taken much deeper and more universal root, it hath occasioned the
making of these wholesome statutes; to complete the efficacy of which,
there is nothing wanting but resolution and integrity to put them in
strict execution.

[Footnote l: In like manner the Julian law _de ambitu_ inflicts fines
and infamy upon all who were guilty of corruption at elections; but,
if the person guilty convicted another offender, he was restored to
his credit again. _Ff._ 48. 14. 1.]

[Footnote m: 4 Inst. 23. Hale of parl. 112. Com. Journ. 10 & 11 May
1571.]

UNDUE influence being thus (I wish the depravity of mankind would
permit me to say, effectually) guarded against, the election is to be
proceeded to on the day appointed; the sheriff or other returning
officer first taking an oath against bribery, and for the due
execution of his office. The candidates likewise, if required, must
swear to their qualification; and the electors in counties to theirs;
and the electors both in counties and boroughs are also compellable to
take the oath of abjuration and that against bribery and corruption.
And it might not be amiss, if the members elected were bound to take
the latter oath, as well as the former; which in all probability
would be much more effectual, than administring it only to the
electors.

THE election being closed, the returning officer in boroughs returns
his precept to the sheriff, with the persons elected by the majority:
and the sheriff returns the whole, together with the writ for the
county and the knights elected thereupon, to the clerk of the crown in
chancery; before the day of meeting, if it be a new parliament, or
within fourteen days after the election, if it be an occasional
vacancy; and this under penalty of 500_l_. If the sheriff does not
return such knights only as are duly elected, he forfeits, by the old
statutes of Henry VI, 100_l_; and the returning officer in boroughs
for a like false return 40_l_; and they are besides liable to an
action, in which double damages shall be recovered, by the later
statutes of king William: and any person bribing the returning officer
shall alio forfeit 300_l_. But the members returned by him are the
sitting members, until the house of commons, upon petition, shall
adjudge the return to be false and illegal. And this abstract of the
proceedings at elections of knights, citizens, and burgesses,
concludes our enquiries into the laws and customs more peculiarly
relative to the house of commons.

VI. I PROCEED now, sixthly, to the method of making laws; which is
much the same in both houses: and I shall touch it very briefly,
beginning in the house of commons. But first I must premise, that for
dispatch of business each house of parliament has it's speaker. The
speaker of the house of lords is the lord chancellor, or keeper of the
king's great seal; whose office it is to preside there, and manage the
formality of business. The speaker of the house of commons is chosen
by the house; but must be approved by the king. And herein the usage
of the two houses differs, that the speaker of the house of commons
cannot give his opinion or argue any question in the house; but the
speaker of the house of lords may. In each house the act of the
majority binds the whole; and this majority is declared by votes
openly and publickly given: not as at Venice, and many other
senatorial assemblies, privately or by ballot. This latter method may
be serviceable, to prevent intrigues and unconstitutional
combinations: but is impossible to be practiced with us; at least in
the house of commons, where every member's conduct is subject to the
future censure of his constituents, and therefore should be openly
submitted to their inspection.

TO bring a bill into the house, if the relief sought by it is of a
private nature, it is first necessary to prefer a petition; which must
be presented by a member, and usually sets forth the grievance desired
to be remedied. This petition (when founded on facts that may be in
their nature disputed) is referred to a committee of members, who
examine the matter alleged, and accordingly report it to the house;
and then (or, otherwise, upon the mere petition) leave is given to
bring in the bill. In public matters the bill is brought in upon
motion made to the house, without any petition at all. Formerly, all
bills were drawn in the form of petitions, which were entered upon the
_parliament rolls_, with the king's answer thereunto subjoined; not in
any settled form of words, but as the circumstances of the case
required[n]: and at the end of each parliament the judges drew them
into the form of a statute, which was entered on the _statute-rolls_.
In the reign of Henry V, to prevent mistakes and abuses, the statutes
were drawn up by the judges before the end of the parliament; and, in
the reign of Henry VI, bills in the form of acts, according to the
modern custom, were first introduced.

[Footnote n: See, among numberless other instances, the _articuli
cleri_, 9 Edw. II.]

THE persons, directed to bring in the bill, present it in a competent
time to the house, drawn out on paper, with a multitude of blanks, or
void spaces, where any thing occurs that is dubious, or necessary to
be settled by the parliament itself; (such, especially, as the precise
date of times, the nature and quantity of penalties, or of any sums of
money to be raised) being indeed only the sceleton of the bill. In the
house of lords, if the bill begins there, it is (when of a private
nature) perused by two of the judges, who settle all points of legal
propriety. This is read a first time, and at a convenient distance a
second time; and after each reading the speaker opens to the house the
substance of the bill, and puts the question, whether it shall proceed
any farther. The introduction of the bill may be originally opposed,
as the bill itself may at either of the readings; and, if the
opposition succeeds, the bill must be dropt for that sessions; as it
must also, if opposed with success in any of the subsequent stages.

AFTER the second reading it is committed, that is, referred to a
committee; which is either selected by the house in matters of small
importance, or else, upon a bill of consequence, the house resolves
itself into a committee of the whole house. A committee of the whole
house is composed of every member; and, to form it, the speaker quits
the chair, (another member being appointed chairman) and may sit and
debate as a private member. In these committees the bill is debated
clause by clause, amendments made, the blanks filled up, and sometimes
the bill entirely new modelled. After it has gone through the
committee, the chairman reports it to the house with such amendments
as the committee have made; and then the house reconsider the whole
bill again, and the question is repeatedly put upon every clause and
amendment. When the house have agreed or disagreed to the amendments
of the committee, and sometimes added new amendments of their own, the
bill is then ordered to be engrossed, or written in a strong gross
hand, on one or more long rolls of parchment sewed together. When this
is finished, it is read a third time, and amendments are sometimes
then made to it; and, if a new clause be added, it is done by tacking
a separate piece of parchment on the bill, which is called a ryder.
The speaker then again opens the contents; and, holding it up in his
hands, puts the question, whether the bill shall pass. If this is
agreed to, one of the members is directed to carry it to the lords,
and desire their concurrence; who, attended by several more, carries
it to the bar of the house of peers, and there delivers it to their
speaker, who comes down from his woolsack to receive it.

IT there passes through the same forms as in the other house, (except
engrossing, which is already done) and, if rejected, no more notice is
taken, but it passes _sub silentio_, to prevent unbecoming
altercations. But if it is agreed to, the lords send a message by two
masters in chancery (or sometimes two of the judges) that they have
agreed to the same: and the bill remains with the lords, if they have
made no amendment to it. But if any amendments are made, such
amendments are sent down with the bill to receive the concurrence of
the commons. If the commons disagree to the amendments, a conference
usually follows between members deputed from each house; who for the
most part settle and adjust the difference: but, if both houses remain
inflexible, the bill is dropped. If the commons agree to the
amendments, the bill is sent back to the lords by one of the members,
with a message to acquaint them therewith. The same forms are
observed, _mutatis mutandis_, when the bill begins in the house of
lords. And when both houses have done with the bill, it always is
deposited in the house of peers, to wait the royal assent.

THIS may be given two ways: 1. In person; when the king comes to the
house of peers, in his crown and royal robes, and sending for the
commons to the bar, the titles of all the bills that have passed both
houses are read; and the king's answer is declared by the clerk of the
parliament in Norman-French: a badge, it must be owned, (now the only
one remaining) of conquest; and which one could wish to see fall into
total oblivion; unless it be reserved as a solemn memento to remind us
that our liberties are mortal, having once been destroyed by a foreign
force. If the king consents to a public bill, the clerk usually
declares, "_le roy le veut_, the king wills it so to be;" if to a
private bill, "_soit fait come il est desirè_, be it as it is
desired." If the king refuses his assent, it is in the gentle language
of "_le roy s'avisera_, the king will advise upon it." 2. By statute
33 Hen. VIII. c. 21. the king may give his assent by letters patent
under his great seal, signed with his hand, and notified, in his
absence, to both houses assembled together in the high house. And,
when the bill has received the royal assent in either of these ways,
it is then, and not before, a statute or act of parliament.

THIS statute or act is placed among the records of the kingdom; there
needing no formal promulgation to give it the force of a law, as was
necessary by the civil law with regard to the emperors edicts: because
every man in England is, in judgment of law, party to the making of an
act of parliament, being present thereat by his representatives.
However, a copy thereof is usually printed at the king's press, for
the information of the whole land. And formerly, before the invention
of printing, it was used to be published by the sheriff of every
county; the king's writ being sent to him at the end of every session,
together with a transcript of all the acts made at that session,
commanding him "_ut statuta illa, et omnes articulos in eisdem
contentos, in singulis locis ubi expedire viderit, publice proclamari,
et firmiter teneri et observari faciat_." And the usage was to
proclaim them at his county court, and there to keep them, that
whoever would might read or take copies thereof; which custom
continued till the reign of Henry the seventh[o].

[Footnote o: 3 Inst. 41. 4 Inst. 26.]

AN act of parliament, thus made, is the exercise of the highest
authority that this kingdom acknowleges upon earth. It hath power to
bind every subject in the land, and the dominions thereunto belonging;
nay, even the king himself, if particularly named therein. And it
cannot be altered, amended, dispensed with, suspended, or repealed,
but in the same forms and by the same authority of parliament: for it
is a maxim in law, that it requires the same strength to dissolve, as
to create an obligation. It is true it was formerly held, that the
king might in many cases dispense with penal statutes[p]: but now by
statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. it is declared, that the suspending or
dispensing with laws by regal authority, without consent of
parliament, is illegal.

[Footnote p: Finch. L. 81. 234.]

VII. THERE remains only, in the seventh and last place, to add a word
or two concerning the manner in which parliaments may be adjourned,
prorogued, or dissolved.

AN adjournment is no more than a continuance of the session from one
day to another, as the word itself signifies: and this is done by the
authority of each house separately every day; and sometimes for a
fortnight or a month together, as at Christmas or Easter, or upon
other particular occasions. But the adjournment of one house is no
adjournment of the other[q]. It hath also been usual, when his majesty
hath signified his pleasure that both or either of the houses should
adjourn themselves to a certain day, to obey the king's pleasure so
signified, and to adjourn accordingly[r]. Otherwise, besides the
indecorum of a refusal, a prorogation would assuredly follow; which
would often be very inconvenient to both public and private business.
For prorogation puts an end to the session; and then such bills, as
are only begun and not perfected, must be resumed _de novo_ (if at
all) in a subsequent session: whereas, after an adjournment, all
things continue in the same state as at the time of the adjournment
made, and may be proceeded on without any fresh commencement.

[Footnote q: 4 Inst. 28.]

[Footnote r: Com. Journ. _passim_: _e.g._ 11 Jun. 1572. 5 Apr. 1604. 4
Jun. 14 Nov. 18 Dec. 1621. 11 Jul. 1625. 13 Sept. 1660. 25 Jul. 1667.
4 Aug. 1685. 24 Febr. 1691. 21 Jun. 1712. 16 Apr. 1717. 3 Feb. 1741.
10 Dec. 1745.]

A PROROGATION is the continuance of the parliament from one session to
another, as an adjournment is a continuation of the session from day
to day. This is done by the royal authority, expressed either by the
lord chancellor in his majesty's presence, or by commission from the
crown, or frequently by proclamation. Both houses are necessarily
prorogued at the same time; it not being a prorogation of the house of
lords, or commons, but of the parliament. The session is never
understood to be at an end, until a prorogation: though, unless some
act be passed or some judgment given in parliament, it is in truth no
session at all[s]. And formerly the usage was, for the king to give
the royal assent to all such bills as he approved, at the end of every
session, and then to prorogue the parliament; though sometimes only
for a day or two[t]: after which all business then depending in the
houses was to be begun again. Which custom obtained so strongly, that
it once became a question[u], whether giving the royal assent to a
single bill did not of course put an end to the session. And, though
it was then resolved in the negative, yet the notion was so deeply
rooted, that the statute 1 Car. I. c. 7. was passed to declare, that
the king's assent to that and some other acts should not put an end to
the session; and, even so late as the restoration of Charles II, we
find a proviso tacked to the first bill then enacted[w] that his
majesty's assent thereto should not determine the session of
parliament. But it now seems to be allowed, that a prorogation must be
expressly made, in order to determine the session. And, if at the time
of an actual rebellion, or imminent danger of invasion, the parliament
shall be separated by adjournment or prorogation, the king is
empowered[x] to call them together by proclamation, with fourteen days
notice of the time appointed for their reassembling.

[Footnote s: 4 Inst. 28. Hale of parl. 38.]

[Footnote t: Com. Journ. 21 Oct. 1553.]

[Footnote u: _Ibid._ 21 Nov. 1554.]

[Footnote w: Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 1.]

[Footnote x: Stat. 30 Geo. II. c. 25.]

A DISSOLUTION is the civil death of the parliament; and this may be
effected three ways: 1. By the king's will, expressed either in person
or by representation. For, as the king has the sole right of convening
the parliament, so also it is a branch of the royal prerogative, that
he may (whenever he pleases) prorogue the parliament for a time, or
put a final period to it's existence. If nothing had a right to
prorogue or dissolve a parliament but itself, it might happen to
become perpetual. And this would be extremely dangerous, if at any
time it should attempt to encroach upon the executive power: as was
fatally experienced by the unfortunate king Charles the first; who,
having unadvisedly passed an act to continue the parliament then in
being till such time as it should please to dissolve itself, at last
fell a sacrifice to that inordinate power, which he himself had
consented to give them. It is therefore extremely necessary that the
crown should be empowered to regulate the duration of these
assemblies, under the limitations which the English constitution has
prescribed: so that, on the one hand, they may frequently and
regularly come together, for the dispatch of business and redress of
grievances; and may not, on the other, even with the consent of the
crown, be continued to an inconvenient or unconstitutional length.

2. A PARLIAMENT may be dissolved by the demise of the crown. This
dissolution formerly happened immediately upon the death of the
reigning sovereign, for he being considered in law as the head of the
parliament, (_caput, principium, et finis_) that failing, the whole
body was held to be extinct. But, the calling a new parliament
immediately on the inauguration of the successor being found
inconvenient, and dangers being apprehended from having no parliament
in being in case of a disputed succession, it was enacted by the
statutes 7 & 8 W. III. c. 15. and 6 Ann. c. 7. that the parliament in
being shall continue for six months after the death of any king or
queen, unless sooner prorogued or dissolved by the successor: that, if
the parliament be, at the time of the king's death, separated by
adjournment or prorogation, it shall notwithstanding assemble
immediately: and that, if no parliament is then in being, the members
of the last parliament shall assemble, and be again a parliament.

3. LASTLY, a parliament may be dissolved or expire by length of time.
For if either the legislative body were perpetual; or might last for
the life of the prince who convened them, as formerly; and were so to
be supplied, by occasionally filling the vacancies with new
representatives; in these cases, if it were once corrupted, the evil
would be past all remedy: but when different bodies succeed each
other, if the people see cause to disapprove of the present, they may
rectify it's faults in the next. A legislative assembly also, which is
sure to be separated again, (whereby it's members will themselves
become private men, and subject to the full extent of the laws which
they have enacted for others) will think themselves bound, in interest
as well as duty, to make only such laws as are good. The utmost extent
of time that the same parliament was allowed to sit, by the statute 6
W. & M. c. 2. was _three_ years; after the expiration of which,
reckoning from the return of the first summons, the parliament was to
have no longer continuance. But by the statute 1 Geo. I. st. 2. c. 38.
(in order, professedly, to prevent the great and continued expenses of
frequent elections, and the violent heats and animosities consequent
thereupon, and for the peace and security of the government then just
recovering from the late rebellion) this term was prolonged to _seven_
years; and, what alone is an instance of the vast authority of
parliament, the very same house, that was chosen for three years,
enacted it's own continuance for seven. So that, as our constitution
now stands, the parliament must expire, or die a natural death, at the
end of every seventh year; if not sooner dissolved by the royal
prerogative.




CHAPTER THE THIRD.

OF THE KING, AND HIS TITLE.


THE supreme executive power of these kingdoms is vested by our laws in
a single person, the king or queen: for it matters not to which sex
the crown descends; but the person entitled to it, whether male or
female, is immediately invested with all the ensigns, rights, and
prerogatives of sovereign power; as is declared by statute 1 Mar. st.
3. c. 1.

IN discoursing of the royal rights and authority, I shall consider the
king under six distinct views: 1. With regard to his title. 2. His
royal family. 3. His councils. 4. His duties. 5. His prerogative. 6.
His revenue. And, first, with regard to his title.

THE executive power of the English nation being vested in a single
person, by the general consent of the people, the evidence of which
general consent is long and immemorial usage, it became necessary to
the freedom and peace of the state, that a rule should be laid down,
uniform, universal, and permanent; in order to mark out with
precision, _who_ is that single person, to whom are committed (in
subservience to the law of the land) the care and protection of the
community; and to whom, in return, the duty and allegiance of every
individual are due. It is of the highest importance to the public
tranquillity, and to the consciences of private men, that this rule
should be clear and indisputable: and our constitution has not left us
in the dark upon this material occasion. It will therefore be the
endeavour of this chapter to trace out the constitutional doctrine of
the royal succession, with that freedom and regard to truth, yet mixed
with that reverence and respect, which the principles of liberty and
the dignity of the subject require.

THE grand fundamental maxim upon which the _jus coronae_, or right of
succession to the throne of these kingdoms, depends, I take to be
this: "that the crown is, by common law and constitutional custom,
hereditary; and this in a manner peculiar to itself: but that the
right of inheritance may from time to time be changed or limited by
act of parliament; under which limitations the crown still continues
hereditary." And this proposition it will be the business of this
chapter to prove, in all it's branches: first, that the crown is
hereditary; secondly, that it is hereditary in a manner peculiar to
itself; thirdly, that this inheritance is subject to limitation by
parliament; lastly, that when it is so limited, it is hereditary in
the new proprietor.

1. FIRST, it is in general _hereditary_, or descendible to the next
heir, on the death or demise of the last proprietor. All regal
governments must be either hereditary or elective: and, as I believe
there is no instance wherein the crown of England has ever been
asserted to be elective, except by the regicides at the infamous and
unparalleled trial of king Charles I, it must of consequence be
hereditary. Yet while I assert an hereditary, I by no means intend a
_jure divino_, title to the throne. Such a title may be allowed to
have subsisted under the theocratic establishments of the children of
Israel in Palestine: but it never yet subsisted in any other country;
save only so far as kingdoms, like other human fabrics, are subject to
the general and ordinary dispensations of providence. Nor indeed have
a _jure divino_ and an _hereditary_ right any necessary connexion with
each other; as some have very weakly imagined. The titles of David and
Jehu were equally _jure divino_, as those of either Solomon or Ahab;
and yet David slew the sons of his predecessor, and Jehu his
predecessor himself. And when our kings have the same warrant as they
had, whether it be to sit upon the throne of their fathers, or to
destroy the house of the preceding sovereign, they will then, and not
before, possess the crown of England by a right like theirs,
_immediately_ derived from heaven. The hereditary right, which the
laws of England acknowlege, owes it's origin to the founders of our
constitution, and to them only. It has no relation to, nor depends
upon, the civil laws of the Jews, the Greeks, the Romans, or any other
nation upon earth: the municipal laws of one society having no
connexion with, or influence upon, the fundamental polity of another.
The founders of our English monarchy might perhaps, if they had
thought proper, have made it an elective monarchy: but they rather
chose, and upon good reason, to establish originally a succession by
inheritance. This has been acquiesced in by general consent; and
ripened by degrees into common law: the very same title that every
private man has to his own estate. Lands are not naturally descendible
any more than thrones: but the law has thought proper, for the benefit
and peace of the public, to establish hereditary succession in one as
well as the other.

IT must be owned, an elective monarchy seems to be the most obvious,
and best suited of any to the rational principles of government, and
the freedom of human nature: and accordingly we find from history
that, in the infancy and first rudiments of almost every state, the
leader, chief magistrate, or prince, hath usually been elective. And,
if the individuals who compose that state could always continue true
to first principles, uninfluenced by passion or prejudice, unassailed
by corruption, and unawed by violence, elective succession were as
much to be desired in a kingdom, as in other inferior communities. The
best, the wisest, and the bravest man would then be sure of receiving
that crown, which his endowments have merited; and the sense of an
unbiassed majority would be dutifully acquiesced in by the few who
were of different opinions. But history and observation will inform
us, that elections of every kind (in the present state of human
nature) are too frequently brought about by influence, partiality, and
artifice: and, even where the case is otherwise, these practices will
be often suspected, and as constantly charged upon the successful, by
a splenetic disappointed minority. This is an evil, to which all
societies are liable; as well those of a private and domestic kind, as
the great community of the public, which regulates and includes the
rest. But in the former there is this advantage; that such suspicions,
if false, proceed no farther than jealousies and murmurs, which time
will effectually suppress; and, if true, the injustice may be remedied
by legal means, by an appeal to those tribunals to which every member
of society has (by becoming such) virtually engaged to submit.
Whereas, in the great and independent society, which every nation
composes, there is no superior to resort to but the law of nature; no
method to redress the infringements of that law, but the actual
exertion of private force. As therefore between two nations,
complaining of mutual injuries, the quarrel can only be decided by the
law of arms; so in one and the same nation, when the fundamental
principles of their common union are supposed to be invaded, and more
especially when the appointment of their chief magistrate is alleged
to be unduly made, the only tribunal to which the complainants can
appeal is that of the God of battels, the only process by which the
appeal can be carried on is that of a civil and intestine war. An
hereditary succession to the crown is therefore now established, in
this and most other countries, in order to prevent that periodical
bloodshed and misery, which the history of antient imperial Rome, and
the more modern experience of Poland and Germany, may shew us are the
consequences of elective kingdoms.

2. BUT, secondly, as to the particular mode of inheritance, it in
general corresponds with the feodal path of descents, chalked out by
the common law in the succession to landed estates; yet with one or
two material exceptions. Like them, the crown will descend lineally
to the issue of the reigning monarch; as it did from king John to
Richard II, through a regular pedigree of six lineal descents. As in
them, the preference of males to females, and the right of
primogeniture among the males, are strictly adhered to. Thus Edward V
succeeded to the crown, in preference to Richard his younger brother
and Elizabeth his elder sister. Like them, on failure of the male
line, it descends to the issue female; according to the antient
British custom remarked by Tacitus[a], "_solent foeminarum ductu
bellare, et sexum in imperiis non discernere_." Thus Mary I succeeded
to Edward VI; and the line of Margaret queen of Scots, the daughter of
Henry VII, succeeded on failure of the line of Henry VIII, his son.
But, among the females, the crown descends by right of primogeniture
to the eldest daughter only and her issue; and not, as in common
inheritances, to all the daughters at once; the evident necessity of a
sole succession to the throne having occasioned the royal law of
descents to depart from the common law in this respect: and therefore
queen Mary on the death of her brother succeeded to the crown alone,
and not in partnership with her sister Elizabeth. Again: the doctrine
of representation prevails in the descent of the crown, as it does in
other inheritances; whereby the lineal descendants of any person
deceased stand in the same place as their ancestor, if living, would
have done. Thus Richard II succeeded his grandfather Edward III, in
right of his father the black prince; to the exclusion of all his
uncles, his grandfather's younger children. Lastly, on failure of
lineal descendants, the crown goes to the next collateral relations of
the late king; provided they are lineally descended from the blood
royal, that is, from that royal stock which originally acquired the
crown. Thus Henry I succeeded to William II, John to Richard I, and
James I to Elizabeth; being all derived from the conqueror, who was
then the only regal stock. But herein there is no objection (as in the
case of common descents) to the succession of a brother, an uncle, or
other collateral relation, of the _half_ blood; that is, where the
relationship proceeds not from the same _couple_ of ancestors (which
constitutes a kinsman of the _whole_ blood) but from a _single_
ancestor only; as when two persons are derived from the same father,
and not from the same mother, or _vice versa_: provided only, that the
one ancestor, from whom both are descended, be he from whose veins the
blood royal is communicated to each. Thus Mary I inherited to Edward
VI, and Elizabeth inherited to Mary; all born of the same father, king
Henry VIII, but all by different mothers. The reason of which
diversity, between royal and common descents, will be better
understood hereafter, when we examine the nature of inheritances in
general.

[Footnote a: _in vit. Agricolae._]

3. THE doctrine of _hereditary_ right does by no means imply an
_indefeasible_ right to the throne. No man will, I think, assert this,
that has considered our laws, constitution, and history, without
prejudice, and with any degree of attention. It is unquestionably in
the breast of the supreme legislative authority of this kingdom, the
king and both houses of parliament, to defeat this hereditary right;
and, by particular entails, limitations, and provisions, to exclude
the immediate heir, and vest the inheritance in any one else. This is
strictly consonant to our laws and constitution; as may be gathered
from the expression so frequently used in our statute book, of "the
king's majesty, his heirs, and successors." In which we may observe,
that as the word, "heirs," necessarily implies an inheritance or
hereditary right, generally subsisting in the royal person; so the
word, "successors," distinctly taken, must imply that this inheritance
may sometimes be broke through; or, that there may be a successor,
without being the heir, of the king. And this is so extremely
reasonable, that without such a power, lodged somewhere, our polity
would be very defective. For, let us barely suppose so melancholy a
case, as that the heir apparent should be a lunatic, an ideot, or
otherwise incapable of reigning: how miserable would the condition of
the nation be, if he were also incapable of being set aside!--It is
therefore necessary that this power should be lodged somewhere: and
yet the inheritance, and regal dignity, would be very precarious
indeed, if this power were _expressly_ and _avowedly_ lodged in the
hands of the subject only, to be exerted whenever prejudice, caprice,
or discontent should happen to take the lead. Consequently it can no
where be so properly lodged as in the two houses of parliament, by and
with the consent of the reigning king; who, it is not to be supposed,
will agree to any thing improperly prejudicial to the rights of his
own descendants. And therefore in the king, lords, and commons, in
parliament assembled, our laws have expressly lodged it.

4. BUT, fourthly; however the crown maybe limited or transferred, it
still retains it's descendible quality, and becomes hereditary in the
wearer of it: and hence in our law the king is said never to die, in
his political capacity; though, in common with other men, he is
subject to mortality in his natural: because immediately upon the
natural death of Henry, William, or Edward, the king survives in his
successor; and the right of the crown vests, _eo instanti_, upon his
heir; either the _haeres natus_, if the course of descent remains
unimpeached, or the _haeres factus_, if the inheritance be under any
particular settlement. So that there can be no _interregnum_; but as
sir Matthew Hale[b] observes, the right of sovereignty is fully
invested in the successor by the very descent of the crown. And
therefore, however acquired, it becomes in him absolutely hereditary,
unless by the rules of the limitation it is otherwise ordered and
determined. In the same manner as landed estates, to continue our
former comparison, are by the law hereditary, or descendible to the
heirs of the owner; but still there exists a power, by which the
property of those lands may be transferred to another person. If this
transfer be made simply and absolutely, the lands will be hereditary
in the new owner, and descend to his heirs at law: but if the transfer
be clogged with any limitations, conditions, or entails, the lands
must descend in that chanel, so limited and prescribed, and no other.

[Footnote b: 1 Hist. P.C. 61.]

IN these four points consists, as I take it, the constitutional notion
of hereditary right to the throne: which will be still farther
elucidated, and made clear beyond all dispute, from a short historical
view of the successions to the crown of England, the doctrines of our
antient lawyers, and the several acts of parliament that have from
time to time been made, to create, to declare, to confirm, to limit,
or to bar, the hereditary title to the throne. And in the pursuit of
this enquiry we shall find, that from the days of Egbert, the first
sole monarch of this kingdom, even to the present, the four cardinal
maxims above mentioned have ever been held the constitutional canons
of succession. It is true, this succession, through fraud, or force,
or sometimes through necessity, when in hostile times the crown
descended on a minor or the like, has been very frequently suspended;
but has always at last returned back into the old hereditary chanel,
though sometimes a very considerable period has intervened. And, even
in those instances where the succession has been violated, the crown
has ever been looked upon as hereditary in the wearer of it. Of which
the usurpers themselves were so sensible, that they for the most part
endeavoured to vamp up some feeble shew of a title by descent, in
order to amuse the people, while they gained the possession of the
kingdom. And, when possession was once gained, they considered it as
the purchase or acquisition of a new estate of inheritance, and
transmitted or endeavoured to transmit it to their own posterity, by a
kind of hereditary right of usurpation.

KING Egbert about the year 800, found himself in possession of the
throne of the west Saxons, by a long and undisturbed descent from his
ancestors of above three hundred years. How his ancestors acquired
their title, whether by force, by fraud, by contract, or by election,
it matters not much to enquire; and is indeed a point of such high
antiquity, as must render all enquiries at best but plausible guesses.
His right must be supposed indisputably good, because we know no
better. The other kingdoms of the heptarchy he acquired, some by
consent, but most by a voluntary submission. And it is an established
maxim in civil polity, and the law of nations, that when one country
is united to another in such a manner, as that one keeps it's
government and states, and the other loses them; the latter entirely
assimilates or is melted down in the former, and must adopt it's laws
and customs[c]. And in pursuance of this maxim there hath ever been,
since the union of the heptarchy in king Egbert, a general
acquiescence under the hereditary monarchy of the west Saxons, through
all the united kingdoms.

[Footnote c: Puff. L. of N. and N. b. 8. c. 12. §. 6.]

FROM Egbert to the death of Edmund Ironside, a period of above two
hundred years, the crown descended regularly, through a succession of
fifteen princes, without any deviation or interruption; save only that
king Edred, the uncle of Edwy, mounted the throne for about nine
years, in the right of his nephew a minor, the times being very
troublesome and dangerous. But this was with a view to preserve, and
not to destroy, the succession; and accordingly Edwy succeeded him.

KING Edmund Ironside was obliged, by the hostile irruption of the
Danes, at first to divide his kingdom with Canute, king of Denmark;
and Canute, after his death, seised the whole of it, Edmund's sons
being driven into foreign countries. Here the succession was suspended
by actual force, and a new family introduced upon the throne: in whom
however this new acquired throne continued hereditary for three
reigns; when, upon the death of Hardiknute, the antient Saxon line was
restored in the person of Edward the confessor.

HE was not indeed the true heir to the crown, being the younger
brother of king Edmund Ironside, who had a son Edward, sirnamed (from
his exile) the outlaw, still living. But this son was then in Hungary;
and, the English having just shaken off the Danish yoke, it was
necessary that somebody on the spot should mount the throne; and the
confessor was the next of the royal line then in England. On his
decease without issue, Harold II usurped the throne, and almost at the
same instant came on the Norman invasion: the right to the crown
being all the time in Edgar, sirnamed Atheling, (which signifies in
the Saxon language the first of the blood royal) who was the son of
Edward the outlaw, and grandson of Edmund Ironside; or, as Matthew
Paris[d] well expresses the sense of our old constitution, "_Edmundus
autem latusferreum, rex naturalis de stirpe regum, genuit Edwardum; et
Edwardus genuit Edgarum, cui de jure debebatur regnum Anglorum_."

[Footnote d: _A.D._ 1066.]

WILLIAM the Norman claimed the crown by virtue of a pretended grant
from king Edward the confessor; a grant which, if real, was in itself
utterly invalid: because it was made, as Harold well observed in his
reply to William's demand[e], "_absque generali senatus et populi
conventu et edicto_;" which also very plainly implies, that it then
was generally understood that the king, with consent of the general
council, might dispose of the crown and change the line of succession.
William's title however was altogether as good as Harold's, he being a
mere private subject, and an utter stranger to the royal blood. Edgar
Atheling's undoubted right was overwhelmed by the violence of the
times; though frequently asserted by the English nobility after the
conquest, till such time as he died without issue: but all their
attempts proved unsuccessful, and only served the more firmly to
establish the crown in the family which had newly acquired it.

[Footnote e: William of Malmsb. _l._ 3.]

THIS conquest then by William of Normandy was, like that of Canute
before, a forcible transfer of the crown of England into a new family:
but, the crown being so transferred, all the inherent properties of
the crown were with it transferred also. For, the victory obtained at
Hastings not being[f] a victory over the nation collectively, but only
over the person of Harold, the only right that the conqueror could
pretend to acquire thereby, was the right to possess the crown of
England, not to alter the nature of the government. And therefore, as
the English laws still remained in force, he must necessarily take
the crown subject to those laws, and with all it's inherent
properties; the first and principal of which was it's descendibility.
Here then we must drop our race of Saxon kings, at least for a while,
and derive our descents from William the conqueror as from a new
stock, who acquired by right of war (such as it is, yet still the
_dernier resort_ of kings) a strong and undisputed title to the
inheritable crown of England.

[Footnote f: Hale, Hist. C.L. c. 5. Seld. review of tithes, c. 8.]

ACCORDINGLY it descended from him to his sons William II and Henry I.
Robert, it must be owned, his eldest son, was kept out of possession
by the arts and violence of his brethren; who proceeded upon a notion,
which prevailed for some time in the law of descents, that when the
eldest son was already provided for (as Robert was constituted duke of
Normandy by his father's will) in such a case the next brother was
entitled to enjoy the rest of their father's inheritance. But, as he
died without issue, Henry at last had a good title to the throne,
whatever he might have at first.

STEPHEN of Blois, who succeeded him, was indeed the grandson of the
conqueror, by Adelicia his daughter, and claimed the throne by a
feeble kind of hereditary right; not as being the nearest of the male
line, but as the nearest male of the blood royal. The real right was
in the empress Matilda or Maud, the daughter of Henry I; the rule of
succession being (where women are admitted at all) that the daughter
of a son shall be preferred to the son of a daughter. So that Stephen
was little better than a mere usurper; and the empress Maud did not
fail to assert her right by the sword: which dispute was attended with
various success, and ended at last in a compromise, that Stephen
should keep the crown, but that Henry the son of Maud should succeed
him; as he afterwards accordingly did.

HENRY, the second of that name, was the undoubted heir of William the
conqueror; but he had also another connexion in blood, which endeared
him still farther to the English. He was lineally descended from
Edmund Ironside, the last of the Saxon race of hereditary kings. For
Edward the outlaw, the son of Edmund Ironside, had (besides Edgar
Atheling, who died without issue) a daughter Margaret, who was married
to Malcolm king of Scotland; and in her the Saxon hereditary right
resided. By Malcolm she had several children, and among the rest
Matilda the wife of Henry I, who by him had the empress Maud, the
mother of Henry II. Upon which account the Saxon line is in our
histories frequently said to have been restored in his person: though
in reality that right subsisted in the _sons_ of Malcolm by queen
Margaret; king Henry's best title being as heir to the conqueror.

FROM Henry II the crown descended to his eldest son Richard I, who
dying childless, the right vested in his nephew Arthur, the son of
Geoffrey his next brother; but John, the youngest son of king Henry,
seised the throne; claiming, as appears from his charters, the crown
by hereditary right[g]: that is to say, he was next of kin to the
deceased king, being his surviving brother; whereas Arthur was removed
one degree farther, being his brother's son, though by right of
representation he stood in the place of his father Geoffrey. And
however flimzey this title, and those of William Rufus and Stephen of
Blois, may appear at this distance to us, after the law of descents
hath now been settled for so many centuries, they were sufficient to
puzzle the understandings of our brave, but unlettered, ancestors. Nor
indeed can we wonder at the number of partizans, who espoused the
pretensions of king John in particular; since even in the reign of his
father, king Henry II, it was a point undetermined[h], whether, even
in common inheritances, the child of an elder brother should succeed
to the land in right of representation, or the younger surviving
brother in right of proximity of blood. Nor is it to this day decided
in the collateral succession to the fiefs of the empire, whether the
order of the stocks, or the proximity of degree shall take place[i].
However, on the death of Arthur and his sister Eleanor without issue,
a clear and indisputable title vested in Henry III the son of John:
and from him to Richard the second, a succession of six generations,
the crown descended in the true hereditary line. Under one of which
race of princes[k], we find it declared in parliament, "that the law
of the crown of England is, and always hath been, that the children of
the king of England, whether born in England, or elsewhere, ought to
bear the inheritance after the death of their ancestors. Which law,
our sovereign lord the king, the prelates, earls, and barons, and
other great men, together with all the commons, in parliament
assembled, do approve and affirm for ever."

[Footnote g: "_Regni Angliae; quod nobis jure competit haereditario._"
Spelm. _Hist. R. Joh. apud_ Wilkins. 354.]

[Footnote h: Glanv. _l._ 7. _c._ 3.]

[Footnote i: Mod. Un. Hist. xxx. 512.]

[Footnote k: Stat. 25 Edw. III. st. 2.]

UPON Richard the second's resignation of the crown, he having no
children, the right resulted to the issue of his grandfather Edward
III. That king had many children, besides his eldest, Edward the black
prince of Wales, the father of Richard II: but to avoid confusion I
shall only mention three; William his second son, who died without
issue; Lionel duke of Clarence, his third son; and John of Gant duke
of Lancaster, his fourth. By the rules of succession therefore the
posterity of Lionel duke of Clarence were entitled to the throne, upon
the resignation of king Richard; and had accordingly been declared by
the king, many years before, the presumptive heirs of the crown; which
declaration was also confirmed in parliament[l]. But Henry duke of
Lancaster, the son of John of Gant, having then a large army in the
kingdom, the pretence of raising which was to recover his patrimony
from the king, and to redress the grievances of the subject, it was
impossible for any other title to be asserted with any safety; and he
became king under the title of Henry IV. But, as sir Matthew Hale
remarks[m], though the people unjustly assisted Henry IV in his
usurpation of the crown, yet he was not admitted thereto, until he had
declared that he claimed, not as a conqueror, (which he very much
inclined to do[n]) but as a successor, descended by right line of the
blood royal; as appears from the rolls of parliament in those times.
And in order to this he set up a shew of two titles: the one upon the
pretence of being the first of the blood royal in the intire male
line, whereas the duke of Clarence left only one daughter Philippa;
from which female branch, by a marriage with Edmond Mortimer earl of
March, the house of York descended: the other, by reviving an exploded
rumour, first propagated by John of Gant, that Edmond earl of
Lancaster (to whom Henry's mother was heiress) was in reality the
elder brother of king Edward I; though his parents, on account of his
personal deformity, had imposed him on the world for the younger: and
therefore Henry would be intitled to the crown, either as successor to
Richard II, in case the intire male line was allowed a preference to
the female; or, even prior to that unfortunate prince, if the crown
could descend through a female, while an intire male line was
existing.

[Footnote l: Sandford's geneal. hist. 246.]

[Footnote m: Hist. C.L. c. 5.]

[Footnote n: Seld. tit. hon. 1. 3.]

HOWEVER, as in Edward the third's time we find the parliament
approving and affirming the right of the crown, as before stated, so
in the reign of Henry IV they actually exerted their right of
new-settling the succession to the crown. And this was done by the
statute 7 Hen. IV. c. 2. whereby it is enacted, "that the inheritance
of the crown and realms of England and France, and all other the
king's dominions, shall be _set and remain_[o] in the person of our
sovereign lord the king, and in the heirs of his body issuing;" and
prince Henry is declared heir apparent to the crown, to hold to him
and the heirs of his body issuing, with remainder to lord Thomas, lord
John, and lord Humphry, the king's sons, and the heirs of their bodies
respectively. Which is indeed nothing more than the law would have
done before, provided Henry the fourth had been a rightful king. It
however serves to shew that it was then generally understood, that the
king and parliament had a right to new-model and regulate the
succession to the crown. And we may observe, with what caution and
delicacy the parliament then avoided declaring any sentiment of
Henry's original title. However sir Edward Coke more than once
expressly declares[p], that at the time of passing this act the right
of the crown was in the descent from Philippa, daughter and heir of
Lionel duke of Clarence.

[Footnote o: _soit mys et demoerge._]

[Footnote p: 4 Inst. 37, 205.]

NEVERTHELESS the crown descended regularly from Henry IV to his son
and grandson Henry V and VI; in the latter of whose reigns the house
of York asserted their dormant title; and, after imbruing the kingdom
in blood and confusion for seven years together, at last established
it in the person of Edward IV. At his accession to the throne, after a
breach of the succession that continued for three descents, and above
threescore years, the distinction of a king _de jure_, and a king _de
facto_ began to be first taken; in order to indemnify such as had
submitted to the late establishment, and to provide for the peace of
the kingdom by confirming all honors conferred, and all acts done, by
those who were now called the usurpers, not tending to the disherison
of the rightful heir. In statute 1 Edw. IV. c. 1. the three Henrys are
stiled, "late kings of England successively in dede, and not of
ryght." And, in all the charters which I have met with of king Edward,
wherever he has occasion to speak of any of the line of Lancaster, he
calls them "_nuper de facto, et non de jure, reges Angliae_."

EDWARD IV left two sons and a daughter; the eldest of which sons, king
Edward V, enjoyed the regal dignity for a very short time, and was
then deposed by Richard his unnatural uncle; who immediately usurped
the royal dignity, having previously insinuated to the populace a
suspicion of bastardy in the children of Edward IV, to make a shew of
some hereditary title: after which he is generally believed to have
murdered his two nephews; upon whose death the right of the crown
devolved to their sister Elizabeth.

THE tyrannical reign of king Richard III gave occasion to Henry earl
of Richmond to assert his title to the crown. A title the most remote
and unaccountable that was ever set up, and which nothing could have
given success to, but the universal detestation of the then usurper
Richard. For, besides that he claimed under a descent from John of
Gant, whose title was now exploded, the claim (such as it was) was
through John earl of Somerset, a bastard son, begotten by John of Gant
upon Catherine Swinford. It is true, that, by an act of parliament 20
Ric. II, this son was, with others, legitimated and made inheritable
to all lands, offices, and dignities, as if he had been born in
wedlock: but still, with an express reservation of the crown,
"_excepta dignitate regali_[q]."

[Footnote q: 4 Inst. 36.]

NOTWITHSTANDING all this, immediately after the battle of Bosworth
field, he assumed the regal dignity; the right of the crown then
being, as sir Edward Coke expressly declares[r], in Elizabeth, eldest
daughter of Edward IV: and his possession was established by
parliament, held the first year of his reign. In the act for which
purpose, the parliament seems to have copied the caution of their
predecessors in the reign of Henry IV; and therefore (as lord Bacon
the historian of this reign observes) carefully avoided any
recognition of Henry VII's right, which indeed was none at all; and
the king would not have it by way of new law or ordinance, whereby a
right might seem to be created and conferred upon him; and therefore a
middle way was rather chosen, by way (as the noble historian expresses
it) of _establishment_, and that under covert and indifferent words,
"that the inheritance of the crown should _rest_, _remain_, and
_abide_ in king Henry VII and the heirs of his body:" thereby
providing for the future, and at the same time acknowleging his
present possession; but not determining either way, whether that
possession was _de jure_ or _de facto_ merely. However he soon after
married Elizabeth of York, the undoubted heiress of the conqueror, and
thereby gained (as sir Edward Coke[s] declares) by much his best title
to the crown. Whereupon the act made in his favour was so much
disregarded, that it never was printed in our statute books.

[Footnote r: 4 Inst. 37.]

[Footnote s: _Ibid._]

HENRY the eighth, the issue of this marriage, succeeded to the crown
by clear indisputable hereditary right, and transmitted it to his
three children in successive order. But in his reign we at several
times find the parliament busy in regulating the succession to the
kingdom. And, first, by statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 12. which recites the
mischiefs, which have and may ensue by disputed titles, because no
perfect and substantial provision hath been made by law concerning the
succession; and then enacts, that the crown shall be entailed to his
majesty, and the sons or heirs males of his body; and in default of
such sons to the lady Elizabeth (who is declared to be the king's
eldest issue female, in exclusion of the lady Mary, on account of her
supposed illegitimacy by the divorce of her mother queen Catherine)
and to the lady Elizabeth's heirs of her body; and so on from issue
female to issue female, and the heirs of their bodies, by course of
inheritance according to their ages, _as the crown of England hath
been accustomed and ought to go_, in case where there be heirs female
of the same: and in default of issue female, then to the king's right
heirs for ever. This single statute is an ample proof of all the four
positions we at first set out with.

BUT, upon the king's divorce from Ann Boleyn, this statute was, with
regard to the settlement of the crown, repealed by statute 28 Hen.
VIII. c. 7. wherein the lady Elizabeth is also, as well as the lady
Mary, bastardized, and the crown settled on the king's children by
queen Jane Seymour, and his future wives; and, in defect of such
children, then with this remarkable remainder, to such persons as the
king by letters patent, or last will and testament, should limit and
appoint the same. A vast power; but, notwithstanding, as it was
regularly vested in him by the supreme legislative authority, it was
therefore indisputably valid. But this power was never carried into
execution; for by statute 35 Hen. VIII. c. 1. the king's two daughters
are legitimated again, and the crown is limited to prince Edward by
name, after that to the lady Mary, and then to the lady Elizabeth, and
the heirs of their respective bodies; which succession took effect
accordingly, being indeed no other than the usual course of the law,
with regard to the descent of the crown.

BUT lest there should remain any doubt in the minds of the people,
through this jumble of acts for limiting the succession, by statute 1
Mar. p. 2. c. 1. queen Mary's hereditary right to the throne is
acknowleged and recognized in these words: "the crown of these realms
is most lawfully, justly, and rightly _descended_ and come to the
queen's highness that now is, being the very, true, and undoubted heir
and inheritrix thereof." And again, upon the queen's marriage with
Philip of Spain, in the statute which settles the preliminaries of
that match[t], the hereditary right to the crown is thus asserted and
declared: "as touching the right of the queen's inheritance in the
realm and dominions of England, the children, whether male or female,
shall succeed in them, according to the known laws, statutes, and
customs of the same." Which determination of the parliament, that the
succession _shall_ continue in the usual course, seems tacitly to
imply a power of new-modelling and altering it, in case the
legislature had thought proper.

[Footnote t: 1 Mar. p. 2. c. 2.]

ON queen Elizabeth's accession, her right is recognized in still
stronger terms than her sister's; the parliament acknowleging[u],
"that the queen's highness is, and in very deed and of most mere right
ought to be, by the laws of God, and the laws and statutes of this
realm, our most lawful and rightful sovereign liege lady and queen;
and that her highness is rightly, lineally, and lawfully descended and
come of the blood royal of this realm of England; in and to whose
princely person, and to the heirs of her body lawfully to be begotten,
after her, the imperial crown and dignity of this realm doth belong."
And in the same reign, by statute 13 Eliz. c. 1. we find the right of
parliament to direct the succession of the crown asserted in the most
explicit words. "If any person shall hold, affirm, or maintain that
the common laws of this realm, not altered by parliament, ought not to
direct the right of the crown of England; or that the queen's majesty,
with and by the authority of parliament, is not able to make laws and
statutes of sufficient force and validity, to limit and bind the crown
of this realm, and the descent, limitation, inheritance, and
government thereof;--such person, so holding, affirming, or
maintaining, shall during the life of the queen be guilty of high
treason; and after her decease shall be guilty of a misdemesnor, and
forfeit his goods and chattels."

[Footnote u: Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 3.]

ON the death of queen Elizabeth, without issue, the line of Henry VIII
became extinct. It therefore became necessary to recur to the other
issue of Henry VII, by Elizabeth of York his queen: whose eldest
daughter Margaret having married James IV king of Scotland, king James
the sixth of Scotland, and of England the first, was the lineal
descendant from that alliance. So that in his person, as clearly as in
Henry VIII, centered all the claims of different competitors from the
conquest downwards, he being indisputably the lineal heir of the
conqueror. And, what is still more remarkable, in his person also
centered the right of the Saxon monarchs, which had been suspended
from the conquest till his accession. For, as was formerly observed,
Margaret the sister of Edgar Atheling, the daughter of Edward the
outlaw, and granddaughter of king Edmund Ironside, was the person in
whom the hereditary right of the Saxon kings, supposing it not
abolished by the conquest, resided. She married Malcolm king of
Scotland; and Henry II, by a descent from Matilda their daughter, is
generally called the restorer of the Saxon line. But it must be
remembered, that Malcolm by his Saxon queen had sons as well as
daughters; and that the royal family of Scotland from that time
downwards were the offspring of Malcolm and Margaret. Of this royal
family king James the first was the direct lineal heir, and therefore
united in his person every possible claim by hereditary right to the
English, as well as Scottish throne, being the heir both of Egbert and
William the conqueror.

AND it is no wonder that a prince of more learning than wisdom, who
could deduce an hereditary title for more than eight hundred years,
should easily be taught by the flatterers of the times to believe
there was something divine in this right, and that the finger of
providence was visible in it's preservation. Whereas, though a wise
institution, it was clearly a human institution; and the right
inherent in him no natural, but a positive right. And in this and no
other light was it taken by the English parliament; who by statute 1
Jac. I. c. 1. did "recognize and acknowlege, that immediately upon the
dissolution and decease of Elizabeth late queen of England, the
imperial crown thereof did by inherent birthright, and lawful and
undoubted succession, descend and come to his most excellent majesty,
as being lineally, justly, and lawfully, next and sole heir of the
blood royal of this realm." Not a word here of any right immediately
derived from heaven: which, if it existed any where, must be sought
for among the _aborigines_ of the island, the antient Britons; among
whose princes indeed some have gone to search it for him[w].

[Footnote w: Elizabeth of York, the mother of queen Margaret of
Scotland, was heiress of the house of Mortimer. And Mr Carte observes,
that the house of Mortimer, in virtue of it's descent from Gladys only
sister to Lewellin ap Jorweth the great, had the true right to the
principality of Wales. iii. 705.]

BUT, wild and absurd as the doctrine of divine right most undoubtedly
is, it is still more astonishing, that when so many human hereditary
rights had centered in this king, his son and heir king Charles the
first should be told by those infamous judges, who pronounced his
unparalleled sentence, that he was an elective prince; elected by his
people, and therefore accountable to them, in his own proper person,
for his conduct. The confusion, instability, and madness, which
followed the fatal catastrophe of that pious and unfortunate prince,
will be a standing argument in favour of hereditary monarchy to all
future ages; as they proved at last to the then deluded people: who,
in order to recover that peace and happiness which for twenty years
together they had lost, in a solemn parliamentary convention of the
states restored the right heir of the crown. And in the proclamation
for that purpose, which was drawn up and attended by both houses[x],
they declared, "that, according to their duty and allegiance, they did
heartily, joyfully, and unanimously acknowlege and proclaim, that
immediately upon the decease of our late sovereign lord king Charles,
the imperial crown of these realms did by inherent birthright and
lawful and undoubted succession descend and come to his most excellent
majesty Charles the second, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully,
next heir of the blood royal of this realm: and thereunto they most
humbly and faithfully did submit and oblige themselves, their heirs
and posterity for ever."

[Footnote x: Com. Journ. 8 May, 1660.]

THUS I think it clearly appears, from the highest authority this
nation is acquainted with, that the crown of England hath been ever an
hereditary crown; though subject to limitations by parliament. The
remainder of this chapter will consist principally of those instances,
wherein the parliament has asserted or exercised this right of
altering and limiting the succession; a right which, we have seen, was
before exercised and asserted in the reigns of Henry IV, Henry VII,
Henry VIII, queen Mary, and queen Elizabeth.

THE first instance, in point of time, is the famous bill of exclusion,
which raised such a ferment in the latter end of the reign of king
Charles the second. It is well known, that the purport of this bill
was to have set aside the king's brother and presumptive heir, the
duke of York, from the succession, on the score of his being a papist;
that it passed the house of commons, but was rejected by the lords;
the king having also declared beforehand, that he never would be
brought to consent to it. And from this transaction we may collect two
things: 1. That the crown was universally acknowleged to be
hereditary; and the inheritance indefeasible unless by parliament:
else it had been needless to prefer such a bill. 2. That the
parliament had a power to have defeated the inheritance: else such a
bill had been ineffectual. The commons acknowleged the hereditary
right then subsisting; and the lords did not dispute the power, but
merely the propriety, of an exclusion. However, as the bill took no
effect, king James the second succeeded to the throne of his
ancestors; and might have enjoyed it during the remainder of his life,
but for his own infatuated conduct, which (with other concurring
circumstances) brought on the revolution in 1688.

THE true ground and principle, upon which that memorable event
proceeded, was an entirely new case in politics, which had never
before happened in our history; the abdication of the reigning
monarch, and the vacancy of the throne thereupon. It was not a
defeazance of the right of succession, and a new limitation of the
crown, by the king and both houses of parliament: it was the act of
the nation alone, upon an apprehension that there was no king in
being. For in a full assembly of the lords and commons, met in
convention upon this apprehended vacancy, both houses[y] came to this
resolution; "that king James the second, having endeavoured to subvert
the constitution of the kingdom, by breaking the original contract
between king and people; and, by the advice of jesuits and other
wicked persons, having violated the fundamental laws; and having
withdrawn himself out of this kingdom; has abdicated the government,
and that the throne is thereby vacant." Thus ended at once, by this
sudden and unexpected vacancy of the throne, the old line of
succession; which from the conquest had lasted above six hundred
years, and from the union of the heptarchy in king Egbert almost nine
hundred. The facts themselves thus appealed to, the king's endeavours
to subvert the constitution by breaking the original contract, his
violation of the fundamental laws, and his withdrawing himself out of
the kingdom, were evident and notorious: and the consequences drawn
from these facts (namely, that they amounted to an abdication of the
government; which abdication did not affect only the person of the
king himself, but also all his heirs, and rendered the throne
absolutely and completely vacant) it belonged to our ancestors to
determine. For, whenever a question arises between the society at
large and any magistrate vested with powers originally delegated by
that society, it must be decided by the voice of the society itself:
there is not upon earth any other tribunal to resort to. And that
these consequences were fairly deduced from these facts, our ancestors
have solemnly determined, in a full parliamentary convention
representing the whole society. The reasons upon which they decided
may be found at large in the parliamentary proceedings of the times;
and may be matter of instructive amusement for us to contemplate, as a
speculative point of history. But care must be taken not to carry this
enquiry farther, than merely for instruction or amusement. The idea,
that the consciences of posterity were concerned in the rectitude of
their ancestors' decisions, gave birth to those dangerous political
heresies, which so long distracted the state, but at length are all
happily extinguished. I therefore rather chuse to consider this great
political measure, upon the solid footing of authority, than to reason
in it's favour from it's justice, moderation, and expedience: because
that might imply a right of dissenting or revolting from it, in case
we should think it unjust, oppressive, or inexpedient. Whereas, our
ancestors having most indisputably a competent jurisdiction to decide
this great and important question, and having in fact decided it, it
is now become our duty at this distance of time to acquiesce in their
determination; being born under that establishment which was built
upon this foundation, and obliged by every tie, religious as well as
civil, to maintain it.

[Footnote y: Com. Journ. 7 Feb. 1688.]

BUT, while we rest this fundamental transaction, in point of
authority, upon grounds the least liable to cavil, we are bound both
in justice and gratitude to add, that it was conducted with a temper
and moderation which naturally arose from it's equity; that, however
it might in some respects go beyond the letter of our antient laws,
(the reason of which will more fully appear hereafter[z]) it was
agreeable to the spirit of our constitution, and the rights of human
nature; and that though in other points (owing to the peculiar
circumstances of things and persons) it was not altogether so perfect
as might have been wished, yet from thence a new aera commenced, in
which the bounds of prerogative and liberty have been better defined,
the principles of government more thoroughly examined and understood,
and the rights of the subject more explicitly guarded by legal
provisions, than in any other period of the English history. In
particular, it is worthy observation that the convention, in this
their judgment, avoided with great wisdom the wild extremes into which
the visionary theories of some zealous republicans would have led
them. They held that this misconduct of king James amounted to an
_endeavour_ to subvert the constitution, and not to an actual
subversion, or total dissolution of the government, according to the
principles of Mr Locke[a]: which would have reduced the society almost
to a state of nature; would have levelled all distinctions of honour,
rank, offices, and property; would have annihilated the sovereign
power, and in consequence have repealed all positive laws; and would
have left the people at liberty to have erected a new system of state
upon a new foundation of polity. They therefore very prudently voted
it to amount to no more than an abdication of the government, and a
consequent vacancy of the throne; whereby the government was allowed
to subsist, though the executive magistrate was gone, and the kingly
office to remain, though king James was no longer king. And thus the
constitution was kept intire; which upon every sound principle of
government must otherwise have fallen to pieces, had so principal and
constituent a part as the royal authority been abolished, or even
suspended.

[Footnote z: See chapter 7.]

[Footnote a: on Gov. p. 2. c. 19.]

THIS single postulatum, the vacancy of the throne, being once
established, the rest that was then done followed almost of course.
For, if the throne be at any time vacant (which may happen by other
means besides that of abdication; as if all the bloodroyal should
fail, without any successor appointed by parliament;) if, I say, a
vacancy by any means whatsoever should happen, the right of disposing
of this vacancy seems naturally to result to the lords and commons,
the trustees and representatives of the nation. For there are no other
hands in which it can so properly be intrusted; and there is a
necessity of it's being intrusted somewhere, else the whole frame of
government must be dissolved and perish. The lords and commons having
therefore determined this main fundamental article, that there was a
vacancy of the throne, they proceeded to fill up that vacancy in such
manner as they judged the most proper. And this was done by their
declaration of 12 February 1688[b], in the following manner: "that
William and Mary, prince and princess of Orange, be, and be declared
king and queen, to hold the crown and royal dignity during their
lives, and the life of the survivor of them; and that the sole and
full exercise of the regal power be only in, and executed by, the said
prince of Orange, in the names of the said prince and princess, during
their joint lives; and after their deceases the said crown and royal
dignity to be to the heirs of the body of the said princess; and for
default of such issue to the princess Anne of Denmark and the heirs of
her body; and for default of such issue to the heirs of the body of
the said prince of Orange."

[Footnote b: Com. Journ. 12 Feb. 1688.]

PERHAPS, upon the principles before established, the convention might
(if they pleased) have vested the regal dignity in a family intirely
new, and strangers to the royal blood: but they were too well
acquainted with the benefits of hereditary succession, and the
influence which it has by custom over the minds of the people, to
depart any farther from the antient line than temporary necessity and
self-preservation required. They therefore settled the crown, first on
king William and queen Mary, king James's eldest daughter, for their
_joint_ lives; then on the survivor of them; and then on the issue of
queen Mary: upon failure of such issue, it was limited to the princess
Anne, king James's second daughter, and her issue; and lastly, on
failure of that, to the issue of king William, who was the grandson of
Charles the first, and nephew as well as son in law of king James the
second, being the son of Mary his only sister. This settlement
included all the protestant posterity of king Charles I, except such
other issue as king James might at any time have, which was totally
omitted through fear of a popish succession. And this order of
succession took effect accordingly.

THESE three princes therefore, king William, queen Mary, and queen
Anne, did not take the crown by hereditary right or _descent_, but by
way of donation or _purchase_, as the lawyers call it; by which they
mean any method of acquiring an estate otherwise than by descent. The
new settlement did not merely consist in excluding king James, and the
person pretended to be prince of Wales, and then suffering the crown
to descend in the old hereditary chanel: for the usual course of
descent was in some instances broken through; and yet the convention
still kept it in their eye, and paid a great, though not total, regard
to it. Let us see how the succession would have stood, if no
abdication had happened, and king James had left no other issue than
his two daughters queen Mary and queen Anne. It would have stood thus:
queen Mary and her issue; queen Anne and her issue; king William and
his issue. But we may remember, that queen Mary was only nominally
queen, jointly with her husband king William, who alone had the regal
power; and king William was absolutely preferred to queen Anne, though
his issue was postponed to hers. Clearly therefore these princes were
successively in possession of the crown by a title different from the
usual course of descent.

IT was towards the end of king William's reign, when all hopes of any
surviving issue from any of these princes died with the duke of
Glocester, that the king and parliament thought it necessary again to
exert their power of limiting and appointing the succession, in order
to prevent another vacancy of the throne; which must have ensued upon
their deaths, as no farther provision was made at the revolution, than
for the issue of king William, queen Mary, and queen Anne. The
parliament had previously by the statute of 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2.
enacted, that every person who should be reconciled to, or hold
communion with, the see of Rome, should profess the popish religion,
or should marry a papist, should be excluded and for ever incapable to
inherit, possess, or enjoy, the crown; and that in such case the
people should be absolved from their allegiance, and the crown should
descend to such persons, being protestants, as would have inherited
the same, in case the person so reconciled, holding communion,
professing, or marrying, were naturally dead. To act therefore
consistently with themselves, and at the same time pay as much regard
to the old hereditary line as their former resolutions would admit,
they turned their eyes on the princess Sophia, electress and duchess
dowager of Hanover, the most accomplished princess of her age[c]. For,
upon the impending extinction of the protestant posterity of Charles
the first, the old law of regal descent directed them to recur to the
descendants of James the first; and the princess Sophia, being the
daughter of Elizabeth queen of Bohemia, who was the youngest daughter
of James the first, was the nearest of the antient blood royal, who
was not incapacitated by professing the popish religion. On her
therefore, and the heirs of her body, being protestants, the remainder
of the crown, expectant on the death of king William and queen Anne
without issue, was settled by statute 12 & 13 W. III. c. 2. And at the
same time it was enacted, that whosoever should hereafter come to the
possession of the crown, should join in the communion of the church of
England as by law established.

[Footnote c: Sandford, in his genealogical history, published _A.D._
1677, speaking (page 535) of the princesses Elizabeth, Louisa, and
Sophia, daughters of the queen of Bohemia, says, the first was reputed
the most learned, the second the greatest artist, and the last one of
the most accomplished ladies in Europe.]

THIS is the last limitation of the crown that has been made by
parliament: and these several actual limitations, from the time of
Henry IV to the present, do clearly prove the power of the king and
parliament to new-model or alter the succession. And indeed it is now
again made highly penal to dispute it: for by the statute 6 Ann. c. 7.
it is enacted, that if any person maliciously, advisedly, and
directly, shall maintain by writing or printing, that the kings of
this realm with the authority of parliament are not able to make laws
to bind the crown and the descent thereof, he shall be guilty of high
treason; or if he maintains the same by only preaching, teaching, or
advised speaking, he shall incur the penalties of a praemunire.

THE princess Sophia dying before queen Anne, the inheritance thus
limited descended on her son and heir king George the first; and,
having on the death of the queen taken effect in his person, from him
it descended to his late majesty king George the second; and from him
to his grandson and heir, our present gracious sovereign, king George
the third.

HENCE it is easy to collect, that the title to the crown is at present
hereditary, though not quite so absolutely hereditary as formerly; and
the common stock or ancestor, from whom the descent must be derived,
is also different. Formerly the common stock was king Egbert; then
William the conqueror; afterwards in James the first's time the two
common stocks united, and so continued till the vacancy of the throne
in 1688: now it is the princess Sophia, in whom the inheritance was
vested by the new king and parliament. Formerly the descent was
absolute, and the crown went to the next heir without any restriction:
but now, upon the new settlement, the inheritance is conditional,
being limited to such heirs only, of the body of the princess Sophia,
as are protestant members of the church of England, and are married to
none but protestants.

AND in this due medium consists, I apprehend, the true constitutional
notion of the right of succession to the imperial crown of these
kingdoms. The extremes, between which it steers, are each of them
equally destructive of those ends for which societies were formed and
are kept on foot. Where the magistrate, upon every succession, is
elected by the people, and may by the express provision of the laws be
deposed (if not punished) by his subjects, this may sound like the
perfection of liberty, and look well enough when delineated on paper;
but in practice will be ever productive of tumult, contention, and
anarchy. And, on the other hand, divine indefeasible hereditary right,
when coupled with the doctrine of unlimited passive obedience, is
surely of all constitutions the most thoroughly slavish and dreadful.
But when such an hereditary right, as our laws have created and vested
in the royal stock, is closely interwoven with those liberties, which,
we have seen in a former chapter, are equally the inheritance of the
subject; this union will form a constitution, in theory the most
beautiful of any, in practice the most approved, and, I trust, in
duration the most permanent. It was the duty of an expounder of our
laws to lay this constitution before the student in it's true and
genuine light: it is the duty of every good Englishman to understand,
to revere, to defend it.




CHAPTER THE FOURTH.

OF THE KING'S ROYAL FAMILY.


THE first and most considerable branch of the king's royal family,
regarded by the laws of England, is the queen.

THE queen of England is either queen _regent_, queen _consort_, or
queen _dowager_. The queen _regent_, _regnant_, or _sovereign_, is she
who holds the crown in her own right; as the first (and perhaps the
second) queen Mary, queen Elizabeth, and queen Anne; and such a one
has the same powers, prerogatives, rights, dignities, and duties, as
if she had been a king. This was observed in the entrance of the last
chapter, and is expressly declared by statute 1 Mar. I. st. 3. c. 1.
But the queen _consort_ is the wife of the reigning king; and she by
virtue of her marriage is participant of divers prerogatives above
other women[a].

[Footnote a: Finch. L. 86.]

AND, first, she is a public person, exempt and distinct from the king;
and not, like other married women, so closely connected as to have
lost all legal or separate existence so long as the marriage
continues. For the queen is of ability to purchase lands, and to
convey them, to make leases, to grant copyholds, and do other acts of
ownership, without the concurrence of her lord; which no other married
woman can do[b]: a privilege as old as the Saxon aera[c]. She is also
capable of taking a grant from the king, which no other wife is from
her husband; and in this particular she agrees with the _augusta_, or
_piissima regina conjux divi imperatoris_ of the Roman laws; who,
according to Justinian[d], was equally capable of making a grant to,
and receiving one from, the emperor. The queen of England hath
separate courts and officers distinct from the king's, not only in
matters of ceremony, but even of law; and her attorney and solicitor
general are intitled to a place within the bar of his majesty's
courts, together with the king's counsel[e]. She may also sue and be
sued alone, without joining her husband. She may also have a separate
property in goods as well as lands, and has a right to dispose of them
by will. In short, she is in all legal proceedings looked upon as a
feme sole, and not as a feme covert; as a single, not as a married
woman[f]. For which the reason given by Sir Edward Coke is this:
because the wisdom of the common law would not have the king (whose
continual care and study is for the public, and _circa ardua regni_)
to be troubled and disquieted on account of his wife's domestic
affairs; and therefore it vests in the queen a power of transacting
her own concerns, without the intervention of the king, as if she was
an unmarried woman.

[Footnote b: 4 Rep. 23.]

[Footnote c: Seld. _Jan. Angl._ 1. 42.]

[Footnote d: _Cod._ 5. 16. 26.]

[Footnote e: Selden tit. hon. 1. 6. 7.]

[Footnote f: Finch. L. 86. Co. Litt. 133.]

THE queen hath also many exemptions, and minute prerogatives. For
instance: she pays no toll[g]; nor is she liable to any amercement in
any court[h]. But in general, unless where the law has expressly
declared her exempted, she is upon the same footing with other
subjects; being to all intents and purposes the king's subject, and
not his equal: in like manner as, in the imperial law, "_augusta
legibus soluta non est_[i]."

[Footnote g: Co. Litt. 133.]

[Footnote h: Finch. L. 185.]

[Footnote i: _Ff._ 1. 3. 31.]

THE queen hath also some pecuniary advantages, which form her a
distinct revenue: as, in the first place, she is intitled to an
antient perquisite called queen-gold or _aurum reginae_; which is a
royal revenue, belonging to every queen consort during her marriage
with the king, and due from every person who hath made a voluntary
offering or fine to the king, amounting to ten marks or upwards, for
and in consideration of any privileges, grants, licences, pardons, or
other matter of royal favour conferred upon him by the king: and it is
due in the proportion of one tenth part more, over and above the
intire offering or fine made to the king; and becomes an actual debt
of record to the queen's majesty by the mere recording the fine[k].
As, if an hundred marks of silver be given to the king for liberty to
take in mortmain, or to have a fair, market, park, chase, or free
warren; there the queen is intitled to ten marks in silver, or (what
was formerly an equivalent denomination) to one mark in gold, by the
name of queen-gold, or _aurum reginae_[l]. But no such payment is due
for any aids or subsidies granted to the king in parliament or
convocation; nor for fines imposed by courts on offenders, against
their will; nor for voluntary presents to the king, without any
consideration moving from him to the subject; nor for any sale or
contract whereby the present revenues or possessions of the crown are
granted away or diminished[m].

[Footnote k: Pryn. _Aur. Reg._ 2.]

[Footnote l: 12 Rep. 21. 4 Inst. 358.]

[Footnote m: _Ibid._ Pryn. 6. Madox. hist. exch. 242.]

THE revenue of our antient queens, before and soon after the conquest,
seems to have consisted in certain reservations or rents out of the
demesne lands of the crown, which were expressly appropriated to her
majesty, distinct from the king. It is frequent in domesday-book,
after specifying the rent due to the crown, to add likewise the
quantity of gold or other renders reserved to the queen[n]. These were
frequently appropriated to particular purposes; to buy wool for her
majesty's use[o], to purchase oyl for her lamps[p], or to furnish her
attire from head to foot[q], which was frequently very costly, as one
single robe in the fifth year of Henry II stood the city of London in
upwards of fourscore pounds[r]. A practice somewhat similar to that of
the eastern countries, where whole cities and provinces were
specifically assigned to purchase particular parts of the queen's
apparel[s]. And, for a farther addition to her income, this duty of
queen-gold is supposed to have been originally granted; those matters
of grace and favour, out of which it arose, being frequently obtained
from the crown by the powerful intercession of the queen. There are
traces of it's payment, though obscure ones, in the book of domesday
and in the great pipe-roll of Henry the first[t]. In the reign of
Henry the second the manner of collecting it appears to have been well
understood, and it forms a distinct head in the antient dialogue of
the exchequer[u] written in the time of that prince, and usually
attributed to Gervase of Tilbury. From that time downwards it was
regularly claimed and enjoyed by all the queen consorts of England
till the death of Henry VIII; though after the accession of the Tudor
family the collecting of it seems to have been much neglected: and,
there being no queen consort afterwards till the accession of James I,
a period of near sixty years, it's very nature and quantity became
then a matter of doubt: and, being referred by the king to his then
chief justices and chief baron, their report of it was so very
unfavorable[w], that queen Anne (though she claimed it) yet never
thought proper to exact it. In 1635, 11 Car. I, a time fertile of
expedients for raising money upon dormant precedents in our old
records (of which ship-money was a fatal instance) the king, at the
petition of his queen Henrietta Maria, issued out his writ for levying
it; but afterwards purchased it of his consort at the price of ten
thousand pounds; finding it, perhaps, too trifling and troublesome to
levy. And when afterwards, at the restoration, by the abolition of the
military tenures, and the fines that were consequent upon them, the
little that legally remained of this revenue was reduced to almost
nothing at all, in vain did Mr Prynne, by a treatise which does honour
to his abilities as a painful and judicious antiquarian, endeavour to
excite queen Catherine to revive this antiquated claim.

[Footnote n: _Bedefordscire. Maner. Lestone redd. per annum xxii lib.
&c: ad opus reginae ii uncias auri.----Herefordscire. In Lene, &c,
consuetud. ut praepositus manerii veniente domina sua (regina) in
maner. praesentaret ei xviii oras denar. ut esset ipsa laeto animo._
Pryn. Append. to _Aur. Reg._ 2, 3.]

[Footnote o: _causa coadunandi lanam reginae._ Domesd. _ibid._]

[Footnote p: _Civitas Lundon. Pro oleo ad lampad. reginae._ _Mag. rot.
pip. temp. Hen. II. ibid._]

[Footnote q: _Vicecomes Berkescire, xvi l. pro cappa reginae._ (_Mag.
rot. pip. 19--22 Hen. II. ibid._) _Civitas Lund. cordubanario reginae
xx s._ _Mag. Rot. 2 Hen. II._ Madox hist. exch. 419.]

[Footnote r: _Pro roba ad opus reginae, quater xx l. & vi s. & viii
d._ _Mag. Rot. 5 Hen. II. ibid._ 250.]

[Footnote s: _Solere aiunt barbaros reges Persarum ac
Syrorum--uxoribus civitates attribuere, hoc modo; haec civitas mulieri
redimiculum praebeat, haec in collum, haec in crines, &c._ _Cic. in
Verrem._ _lib._ 3. _c._ 33.]

[Footnote t: See Madox _Disceptat. epistolar._ 74. Pryn. _Aur. Regin._
Append. 5.]

[Footnote u: _lib._ 2. _c._ 26.]

[Footnote w: Mr Prynne, with some appearance of reason, insinuates,
that their researches were very superficial. _Aur. Reg._ 125.]

ANOTHER antient perquisite belonging to the queen consort, mentioned
by all our old writers[x], and, therefore only, worthy notice, is
this: that on the taking of a whale on the coasts, which is a royal
fish, it shall be divided between the king and queen; the head only
being the king's property, and the tail of it the queen's. "_De
sturgione observetur, quod rex illum habebit integrum: de balena vero
sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam._" The reason of this
whimsical division, as assigned by our antient records[y], was, to
furnish the queen's wardrobe with whalebone.

[Footnote x: Bracton, _l._ 3. _c._ 3. Britton, _c._ 17. Fleta, _l._ 1.
_c._ 45 & 46.]

[Footnote y: Pryn. _Aur. Reg._ 127.]

BUT farther: though the queen is in all respects a subject, yet, in
point of the security of her life and person, she is put on the same
footing with the king. It is equally treason (by the statute 25 Edw.
III.) to compass or imagine the death of our lady the king's
companion, as of the king himself: and to violate, or defile, the
queen consort, amounts to the same high crime; as well in the person
committing the fact, as in the queen herself, if consenting. A law of
Henry the eighth[z] made it treason also for any woman, who was not a
virgin, to marry the king without informing him thereof. But this law
was soon after repealed; it trespassing too strongly, as well on
natural justice, as female modesty. If however the queen be accused
of any species of treason, she shall (whether consort or dowager) be
tried by the house of peers, as queen Ann Boleyn was in 28 Hen. VIII.

[Footnote z: Stat. 33 Hen. VIII. c. 21.]

THE husband of a queen regnant, as prince George of Denmark was to
queen Anne, is her subject; and may be guilty of high treason against
her: but, in the instance of conjugal fidelity, he is not subjected to
the same penal restrictions. For which the reason seems to be, that,
if a queen consort is unfaithful to the royal bed, this may debase or
bastardize the heirs to the crown; but no such danger can be
consequent on the infidelity of the husband to a queen regnant.

A QUEEN _dowager_ is the widow of the king, and as such enjoys most of
the privileges belonging to her as queen consort. But it is not high
treason to conspire her death; or to violate her chastity, for the
same reason as was before alleged, because the succession to the crown
is not thereby endangered. Yet still, _pro dignitate regali_, no man
can marry a queen dowager without special licence from the king, on
pain of forfeiting his lands and goods. This sir Edward Coke[a] tells
us was enacted in parliament in 6 Hen. IV, though the statute be not
in print. But she, though an alien born, shall still be intitled to
dower after the king's demise, which no other alien is[b]. A queen
dowager, when married again to a subject, doth not lose her regal
dignity, as peeresses dowager do their peerage when they marry
commoners. For Katherine, queen dowager of Henry V, though she married
a private gentleman, Owen ap Meredith ap Theodore, commonly called
Owen Tudor; yet, by the name of Katherine queen of England, maintained
an action against the bishop of Carlisle. And so the queen of Navarre
marrying with Edmond, brother to king Edward the first, maintained an
action of dower by the name of queen of Navarre[c].

[Footnote a: 2 Inst. 18.]

[Footnote b: Co. Litt. 31 _b._]

[Footnote c: 2 Inst. 50.]

THE prince of Wales, or heir apparent to the crown, and also his royal
consort, and the princess royal, or eldest daughter of the king, are
likewise peculiarly regarded by the laws. For, by statute 25 Edw. III,
to compass or conspire the death of the former, or to violate the
chastity of either of the latter, are as much high treason, as to
conspire the death of the king, or violate the chastity of the queen.
And this upon the same reason, as was before given; because the prince
of Wales is next in succession to the crown, and to violate his wife
might taint the blood royal with bastardy: and the eldest daughter of
the king is also alone inheritable to the crown, in failure of issue
male, and therefore more respected by the laws than any of her younger
sisters; insomuch that upon this, united with other (feodal)
principles, while our military tenures were in force, the king might
levy an aid for marrying his eldest daughter, and her only. The heir
apparent to the crown is usually made prince of Wales and earl of
Chester, by special creation, and investiture; but, being the king's
eldest son, he is by inheritance duke of Cornwall, without any new
creation[d].

[Footnote d: 8 Rep. 1. Seld. titl. of hon. 2. 5.]

THE younger sons and daughters of the king, who are not in the
immediate line of succession, are little farther regarded by the laws,
than to give them precedence before all peers and public officers as
well ecclesiastical as temporal. This is done by the statute 31 Hen.
VIII. c. 10. which enacts that no person, except the king's children,
shall presume to sit or have place at the side of the cloth of estate
in the parliament chamber; and that certain great officers therein
named shall have precedence above all dukes, except only such as shall
happen to be the king's son, brother, uncle, nephew (which sir Edward
Coke[e] explains to signify grandson or _nepos_) or brother's or
sister's son. And in 1718, upon a question referred to all the judges
by king George I, it was resolved by the opinion of ten against the
other two, that the education and care of all the king's
grandchildren while minors, and the care and approbation of their
marriages, when grown up, did belong of right to his majesty as king
of this realm, during their father's life[f]. And this may suffice for
the notice, taken by law, of his majesty's royal family.

[Footnote e: 4 Inst. 362.]

[Footnote f: Fortesc. Al. 401-440.]




CHAPTER THE FIFTH.

OF THE COUNCILS BELONGING TO THE KING.


THE third point of view, in which we are to consider the king, is with
regard to his councils. For, in order to assist him in the discharge
of his duties, the maintenance of his dignity, and the exertion of his
prerogative, the law hath assigned him a diversity of councils to
advise with.

1. THE first of these is the high court of parliament, whereof we have
already treated at large.

2. SECONDLY, the peers of the realm are by their birth hereditary
counsellors of the crown, and may be called together by the king to
impart their advice in all matters of importance to the realm, either
in time of parliament, or, which hath been their principal use, when
there is no parliament in being[a]. Accordingly Bracton[b], speaking
of the nobility of his time, says they might properly be called
"_consules, a consulendo; reges enim tales sibi associant ad
consulendum_." And in our law books[c] it is laid down, that peers are
created for two reasons; 1. _Ad consulendum_, 2. _Ad defendendum
regem_: for which reasons the law gives them certain great and high
privileges; such as freedom from arrests, &c, even when no parliament
is sitting: because the law intends, that they are always assisting
the king with their counsel for the commonwealth; or keeping the realm
in safety by their prowess and valour.

[Footnote a: Co. Litt. 110.]

[Footnote b: _l._ 1. _c._ 8.]

[Footnote c: 7 Rep. 34. 9 Rep. 49. 12 Rep. 96.]

INSTANCES of conventions of the peers, to advise the king, have been
in former times very frequent; though now fallen into disuse, by
reason of the more regular meetings of parliament. Sir Edward Coke[d]
gives us an extract of a record, 5 Hen. IV, concerning an exchange of
lands between the king and the earl of Northumberland, wherein the
value of each was agreed to be settled by advice of parliament (if any
should be called before the feast of St Lucia) or otherwise by advice
of the grand council (of peers) which the king promises to assemble
before the said feast, in case no parliament shall be called. Many
other instances of this kind of meeting are to be found under our
antient kings: though the formal method of convoking them had been so
long left off, that when king Charles I in 1640 issued out writs under
the great seal to call a great council of all the peers of England to
meet and attend his majesty at York, previous to the meeting of the
long parliament, the earl of Clarendon[e] mentions it as a new
invention, not before heard of; that is, as he explains himself, so
old, that it had not been practiced in some hundreds of years. But,
though there had not so long before been an instance, nor has there
been any since, of assembling them in so solemn a manner, yet, in
cases of emergency, our princes have at several times thought proper
to call for and consult as many of the nobility as could easily be got
together: as was particularly the case with king James the second,
after the landing of the prince of Orange; and with the prince of
Orange himself, before he called that convention parliament, which
afterwards called him to the throne.

[Footnote d: 1 Inst. 110.]

[Footnote e: Hist. b. 2.]

BESIDES this general meeting, it is usually looked upon to be the
right of each particular peer of the realm, to demand an audience of
the king, and to lay before him, with decency and respect, such
matters as he shall judge of importance to the public weal. And
therefore, in the reign of Edward II, it was made an article of
impeachment in parliament against the two Hugh Spencers, father and
son, for which they were banished the kingdom, "that they by their
evil covin would not suffer the great men of the realm, the king's
good counsellors, to speak with the king, or to come near him; but
only in the presence and hearing of the said Hugh the father and Hugh
the son, or one of them, and at their will, and according to such
things as pleased them[f]."

[Footnote f: 4 Inst. 53.]

3. A THIRD council belonging the king, are, according to sir Edward
Coke[g], his judges of the courts of law, for law matters. And this
appears frequently in our statutes, particularly 14 Ed. III. c. 5. and
in other books of law. So that when the king's council is mentioned
generally, it must be defined, particularized, and understood,
_secundum subjectam materiam_; and, if the subject be of a legal
nature, then by the king's council is understood his council for
matters of law; namely, his judges. Therefore when by statute 16 Ric.
II. c. 5. it was made a high offence to import into this kingdom any
papal bulles, or other processes from Rome; and it was enacted, that
the offenders should be attached by their bodies, and brought before
the king and his _council_ to answer for such offence; here, by the
expression of king's _council_, were understood the king's judges of
his courts of justice, the subject matter being legal: this being the
general way of interpreting the word, _council_[h].

[Footnote g: 1 Inst. 110.]

[Footnote h: 3 Inst. 125.]

4. BUT the principal council belonging to the king is his privy
council, which is generally called, by way of eminence, _the council_.
And this, according to sir Edward Coke's description of it[i], is a
noble, honorable, and reverend assembly, of the king and such as he
wills to be of his privy council, in the king's court or palace. The
king's will is the sole constituent of a privy counsellor; and this
also regulates their number, which of antient time was twelve or
thereabouts. Afterwards it increased to so large a number, that it was
found inconvenient for secresy and dispatch; and therefore king
Charles the second in 1679 limited it to thirty: whereof fifteen were
to be the principal officers of state, and those to be counsellors,
_virtute officii_; and the other fifteen were composed of ten lords
and five commoners of the king's choosing[k]. But since that time the
number has been much augmented, and now continues indefinite. At the
same time also, the antient office of lord president of the council
was revived in the person of Anthony earl of Shaftsbury; an officer,
that by the statute of 31 Hen. VIII. c. 10. has precedence next after
the lord chancellor and lord treasurer.

[Footnote i: 4 Inst. 53.]

[Footnote k: Temple's Mem. part 3.]

PRIVY counsellors are _made_ by the king's nomination, without either
patent or grant; and, on taking the necessary oaths, they become
immediately privy counsellors during the life of the king that chooses
them, but subject to removal at his discretion.

THE _duty_ of a privy counsellor appears from the oath of office[l],
which consists of seven articles: 1. To advise the king according to
the best of his cunning and discretion. 2. To advise for the king's
honour and good of the public, without partiality through affection,
love, meed, doubt, or dread. 3. To keep the king's counsel secret. 4.
To avoid corruption. 5. To help and strengthen the execution of what
shall be there resolved. 6. To withstand all persons who would attempt
the contrary. And, lastly, in general, 7. To observe, keep, and do all
that a good and true counsellor ought to do to his sovereign lord.

[Footnote l: 4 Inst. 54.]

THE _power_ of the privy council is to enquire into all offences
against the government, and to commit the offenders into custody, in
order to take their trial in some of the courts of law. But their
jurisdiction is only to enquire, and not to punish: and the persons
committed by them are entitled to their _habeas corpus_ by statute 16
Car. I. c. 10. as much as if committed by an ordinary justice of the
peace. And, by the same statute, the court of starchamber, and the
court of requests, both of which consisted of privy counsellors, were
dissolved; and it was declared illegal for them to take cognizance of
any matter of property, belonging to the subjects of this kingdom.
But, in plantation or admiralty causes, which arise out of the
jurisdiction of this kingdom, and in matters of lunacy and ideocy
(being a special flower of the prerogative) with regard to these,
although they may eventually involve questions of extensive property,
the privy council continues to have cognizance, being the court of
appeal in such causes: or, rather, the appeal lies to the king's
majesty himself, assisted by his privy council.

AS to the _qualifications_ of members to sit this board: any natural
born subject of England is capable of being a member of the privy
council; taking the proper oaths for security of the government, and
the test for security of the church. But, in order to prevent any
persons under foreign attachments from insinuating themselves into
this important trust, as happened in the reign of king William in many
instances, it is enacted by the act of settlement[m], that no person
born out of the dominions of the crown of England, unless born of
English parents, even though naturalized by parliament, shall be
capable of being of the privy council.

[Footnote m: Stat. 12. & 13 W. III. c. 2.]

THE _privileges_ of privy counsellors, as such, consist principally in
the security which the law has given them against attempts and
conspiracies to destroy their lives. For, by statute 3 Hen. VII. c.
14. if any of the king's servants of his houshold, conspire or imagine
to take away the life of a privy counsellor, it is felony, though
nothing be done upon it. And the reason of making this statute, sir
Edward Coke[n] tells us, was because such servants have greater and
readier means, either by night or by day, to destroy such as be of
great authority, and near about the king: and such a conspiracy was,
just before this parliament, made by some of king Henry the seventh's
houshold servants, and great mischief was like to have ensued
thereupon. This extends only to the king's menial servants. But the
statute 9 Ann. c. 16. goes farther, and enacts, that _any persons_
that shall unlawfully attempt to kill, or shall unlawfully assault,
and strike, or wound, any privy counsellor in the execution of his
office, shall be felons, and suffer death as such. This statute was
made upon the daring attempt of the sieur Guiscard, who stabbed Mr
Harley, afterwards earl of Oxford, with a penknife, when under
examination for high crimes in a committee of the privy council.

[Footnote n: 3 Inst. 38.]

THE _dissolution_ of the privy council depends upon the king's
pleasure; and he may, whenever he thinks proper, discharge any
particular member, or the whole of it, and appoint another. By the
common law also it was dissolved _ipso facto_ by the king's demise; as
deriving all it's authority from him. But now, to prevent the
inconveniences of having no council in being at the accession of a new
prince, it is enacted by statute 6 Ann. c. 7. that the privy council
shall continue for six months after the demise of the crown, unless
sooner determined by the successor.




CHAPTER THE SIXTH.

OF THE KING'S DUTIES.


I PROCEED next to the duties, incumbent on the king by our
constitution; in consideration of which duties his dignity and
prerogative are established by the laws of the land: it being a maxim
in the law, that protection and subjection are reciprocal[a]. And
these reciprocal duties are what, I apprehend, were meant by the
convention in 1688, when they declared that king James had broken the
_original contract_ between king and people. But however, as the terms
of that original contract were in some measure disputed, being alleged
to exist principally in theory, and to be only deducible by reason and
the rules of natural law; in which deduction different understandings
might very considerably differ; it was, after the revolution, judged
proper to declare these duties expressly; and to reduce that contract
to a plain certainty. So that, whatever doubts might be formerly
raised by weak and scrupulous minds about the existence of such an
original contract, they must now entirely cease; especially with
regard to every prince, who has reigned since the year 1688.

[Footnote a: 7 Rep. 5.]

THE principal duty of the king is, to govern his people according to
law. _Nec regibus infinita aut libera potestas_, was the constitution
of our German ancestors on the continent[b]. And this is not only
consonant to the principles of nature, of liberty, of reason, and of
society, but has always been esteemed an express part of the common
law of England, even when prerogative was at the highest. "The king,"
saith Bracton[c], who wrote under Henry III, "ought not to be subject
to man, but to God, and to the law; for the law maketh the king. Let
the king therefore render to the law, what the law has invested in him
with regard to others; dominion, and power: for he is not truly king,
where will and pleasure rules, and not the law." And again[d]; "the
king also hath a superior, namely God, and also the law, by which he
was made a king." Thus Bracton: and Fortescue also[e], having first
well distinguished between a monarchy absolutely and despotically
regal, which is introduced by conquest and violence, and a political
or civil monarchy, which arises from mutual consent; (of which last
species he asserts the government of England to be) immediately lays
it down as a principle, that "the king of England must rule his people
according to the decrees of the laws thereof: insomuch that he is
bound by an oath at his coronation to the observance and keeping of
his own laws." But, to obviate all doubts and difficulties concerning
this matter, it is expressly declared by statute 12 & 13 W. III. c. 2.
that "the laws of England are the birthright of the people thereof;
and all the kings and queens who shall ascend the throne of this realm
ought to administer the government of the same according to the said
laws; and all their officers and ministers ought to serve them
respectively according to the same: and therefore all the laws and
statutes of this realm, for securing the established religion, and the
rights and liberties of the people thereof, and all other laws and
statutes of the same now in force, are by his majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal and commons,
and by authority of the same, ratified and confirmed accordingly."

[Footnote b: _Tac. de M.G._ _c._ 7.]

[Footnote c: _l._ 1. _c._ 8.]

[Footnote d: _l._ 2. _c._ 16. §. 3.]

[Footnote e: _c._ 9. & 34.]

AND, as to the terms of the original contract between king and people,
these I apprehend to be now couched in the coronation oath, which by
the statute 1 W. & M. st. 1. c. 6. is to be administred to every king
and queen, who shall succeed to the imperial crown of these realms, by
one of the archbishops or bishops of the realm, in the presence of all
the people; who on their parts do reciprocally take the oath of
allegiance to the crown. This coronation oath is conceived in the
following terms:

"_The archbishop or bishop shall say_, Will you solemnly promise and
swear to govern the people of this kingdom of England, and the
dominions thereto belonging, according to the statutes in parliament
agreed on, and the laws and customs of the same?--_The king or queen
shall say_, I solemnly promise so to do.

"_Archbishop or bishop._ Will you to your power cause law and justice,
in mercy, to be executed in all your judgments?--_King or queen._ I
will.

"_Archbishop or bishop._ Will you to the utmost of your power maintain
the laws of God, the true profession of the gospel, and the protestant
reformed religion established by the law? And will you preserve unto
the bishops and clergy of this realm, and to the churches committed to
their charge, all such rights and privileges as by law do or shall
appertain unto them, or any of them?--_King or queen._ All this I
promise to do.

"_After this the king or queen, laying his or her hand upon the holy
gospels, shall say_, The things which I have here before promised I
will perform and keep: so help me God. _And then shall kiss the
book._"

THIS is the form of the coronation oath, as it is now prescribed by
our laws: the principal articles of which appear to be at least as
antient as the mirror of justices[f], and even as the time of
Bracton[g]: but the wording of it was changed at the revolution,
because (as the statute alleges) the oath itself had been framed in
doubtful words and expressions, with relation to antient laws and
constitutions at this time unknown[h]. However, in what form soever it
be conceived, this is most indisputably a fundamental and original
express contract; though doubtless the duty of protection is impliedly
as much incumbent on the sovereign before coronation as after: in the
same manner as allegiance to the king becomes the duty of the subject
immediately on the descent of the crown, before he has taken the oath
of allegiance, or whether he ever takes it at all. This reciprocal
duty of the subject will be considered in it's proper place. At
present we are only to observe, that in the king's part of this
original contract are expressed all the duties that a monarch can owe
to his people; viz. to govern according to law: to execute judgment in
mercy: and to maintain the established religion.

[Footnote f: _cap._ 1. §. 2.]

[Footnote g: _l._ 3. _tr._ 1. _c._ 9.]

[Footnote h: In the old folio abridgment of the statutes, printed by
Lettou and Machlinia in the reign of Edward IV, (_penes me_) there is
preserved a copy of the old coronation oath; which, as the book is
extremely scarce, I will here transcribe. _Ceo est le serement que le
roy jurre a soun coronement: que il gardera et meintenera lez droitez
et lez franchisez de seynt esglise grauntez auncienment dez droitez
roys christiens dEngletere, et quil gardera toutez sez terrez honoures
et dignitees droiturelx et franks del coron du roialme dEngletere en
tout maner dentierte sanz null maner damenusement, et lez droitez
dispergez dilapidez ou perduz de la corone a soun poiair reappeller en
launcien estate, et quil gardera le peas de seynt esglise et al
clergie et al people de bon accorde, et quil face faire en toutez sez
jugementez owel et droit justice oue discrecion et misericorde, et
quil grauntera a tenure lez leyes et custumez du roialme, et a soun
poiair lez face garder et affermer que lez gentez du people avont
faitez et esliez, et les malveys leyz et custumes de tout oustera, et
ferme peas et establie al people de soun roialme en ceo garde
esgardera a soun poiair: come Dieu luy aide._ _Tit. sacramentum regis.
fol. m. ij._]




CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.

OF THE KING'S PREROGATIVE.


IT was observed in a former chapter[a], that one of the principal
bulwarks of civil liberty, or (in other words) of the British
constitution, was the limitation of the king's prerogative by bounds
so certain and notorious, that it is impossible he should ever exceed
them, without the consent of the people, on the one hand; or without,
on the other, a violation of that original contract, which in all
states impliedly, and in ours most expressly, subsists between the
prince and the subject. It will now be our business to consider this
prerogative minutely; to demonstrate it's necessity in general; and to
mark out in the most important instances it's particular extent and
restrictions: from which considerations this conclusion will evidently
follow, that the powers which are vested in the crown by the laws of
England, are necessary for the support of society; and do not intrench
any farther on our _natural_ liberties, than is expedient for the
maintenance of our _civil_.

[Footnote a: chap. 1. page 137.]

THERE cannot be a stronger proof of that genuine freedom, which is the
boast of this age and country, than the power of discussing and
examining, with decency and respect, the limits of the king's
prerogative. A topic, that in some former ages was thought too
delicate and sacred to be profaned by the pen of a subject. It was
ranked among the _arcana imperii_; and, like the mysteries of the
_bona dea_, was not suffered to be pried into by any but such as were
initiated in it's service: because perhaps the exertion of the one,
like the solemnities of the other, would not bear the inspexion of a
rational and sober enquiry. The glorious queen Elizabeth herself made
no scruple to direct her parliaments to abstain from discoursing of
matters of state[b]; and it was the constant language of this favorite
princess and her ministers, that even that august assembly "ought not
to deal, to judge, or to meddle, with her majesty's prerogative
royal[c]." And her successor, king James the first, who had imbibed
high notions of the divinity of regal sway, more than once laid it
down in his speeches, that "as it is atheism and blasphemy in a
creature to dispute what the deity may do, so it is presumption and
sedition in a subject to dispute what a king may do in the height of
his power: good christians, he adds, will be content with God's will,
revealed in his word; and good subjects will rest in the king's will,
revealed in _his_ law[d]."

[Footnote b: Dewes. 479.]

[Footnote c: _Ibid._ 645.]

[Footnote d: King James's works. 557, 531.]

BUT, whatever might be the sentiments of some of our princes, this was
never the language of our antient constitution and laws. The
limitation of the regal authority was a first and essential principle
in all the Gothic systems of government established in Europe; though
gradually driven out and overborne, by violence and chicane, in most
of the kingdoms on the continent. We have seen, in the preceding
chapter, the sentiments of Bracton and Fortescue, at the distance of
two centuries from each other. And sir Henry Finch, under Charles the
first, after the lapse of two centuries more, though he lays down the
law of prerogative in very strong and emphatical terms, yet qualifies
it with a general restriction, in regard to the liberties of the
people. "The king hath a prerogative in all things, that are not
injurious to the subject; for in them all it must be remembered, that
the king's prerogative stretcheth not to the doing of any wrong[e]."
_Nihil enim aliud potest rex, nisi id solum quod de jure potest_[f].
And here it may be some satisfaction to remark, how widely the civil
law differs from our own, with regard to the authority of the laws
over the prince, or (as a civilian would rather have expressed it) the
authority of the prince over the laws. It is a maxim of the English
law, as we have seen from Bracton, that "_rex debet esse sub lege,
quia lex facit regem_:" the imperial law will tell us, that "_in
omnibus, imperatoris excipitur fortuna; cui ipsas leges Deus
subjecit_[g]." We shall not long hesitate to which of them to give the
preference, as most conducive to those ends for which societies were
framed, and are kept together; especially as the Roman lawyers
themselves seem to be sensible of the unreasonableness of their own
constitution. "_Decet tamen principem_," says Paulus, "_servare leges,
quibus ipse solutus est_[h]." This is at once laying down the
principle of despotic power, and at the same time acknowleging it's
absurdity.

[Footnote e: Finch. L. 84, 85.]

[Footnote f: Bract. _l._ 3. _tr._ 1. _c._ 9.]

[Footnote g: _Nov._ 105. §. 2.]

[Footnote h: _Ff._ 32. 1. 23.]

BY the word prerogative we usually understand that special
pre-eminence, which the king hath, over and above all other persons,
and out of the ordinary course of the common law, in right of his
regal dignity. It signifies, in it's etymology, (from _prae_ and
_rogo_) something that is required or demanded before, or in
preference to, all others. And hence it follows, that it must be in
it's nature singular and eccentrical; that it can only be applied to
those rights and capacities which the king enjoys alone, in
contradistinction to others, and not to those which he enjoys in
common with any of his subjects: for if once any one prerogative of
the crown could be held in common with the subject, it would cease to
be prerogative any longer. And therefore Finch[i] lays it down as a
maxim, that the prerogative is that law in case of the king, which is
law in no case of the subject.

[Footnote i: Finch. L. 85.]

PREROGATIVES are either _direct_ or _incidental_. The _direct_ are
such positive substantial parts of the royal character and authority,
as are rooted in and spring from the king's political person,
considered merely by itself, without reference to any other extrinsic
circumstance; as, the right of sending embassadors, of creating peers,
and of making war or peace. But such prerogatives as are _incidental_
bear always a relation to something else, distinct from the king's
person; and are indeed only exceptions, in favour of the crown, to
those general rules that are established for the rest of the
community: such as, that no costs shall be recovered against the king;
that the king can never be a joint-tenant; and that his debt shall be
preferred before a debt to any of his subjects. These, and an infinite
number of other instances, will better be understood, when we come
regularly to consider the rules themselves, to which these incidental
prerogatives are exceptions. And therefore we will at present only
dwell upon the king's substantive or direct prerogatives.

THESE substantive or direct prerogatives may again be divided into
three kinds: being such as regard, first, the king's royal
_character_; secondly, his royal _authority_; and, lastly, his royal
_income_. These are necessary, to secure reverence to his person,
obedience to his commands, and an affluent supply for the ordinary
expenses of government; without all of which it is impossible to
maintain the executive power in due independence and vigour. Yet, in
every branch of this large and extensive dominion, our free
constitution has interposed such seasonable checks and restrictions,
as may curb it from trampling on those liberties, which it was meant
to secure and establish. The enormous weight of prerogative (if left
to itself, as in arbitrary government it is) spreads havoc and
destruction among all the inferior movements: but, when balanced and
bridled (as with us) by it's proper counterpoise, timely and
judiciously applied, it's operations are then equable and regular, it
invigorates the whole machine, and enables every part to answer the
end of it's construction.

IN the present chapter we shall only consider the two first of these
divisions, which relate to the king's political _character_ and
_authority_; or, in other words, his _dignity_ and regal _power_; to
which last the name of prerogative is frequently narrowed and
confined. The other division, which forms the royal _revenue_, will
require a distinct examination; according to the known distribution of
the feodal writers, who distinguish the royal prerogatives into the
_majora_ and _minora regalia_, in the latter of which classes the
rights of the revenue are ranked. For, to use their own words,
"_majora regalia imperii praeeminentiam spectant; minora vero ad
commodum pecuniarium immediate attinent; et haec proprie fiscalia
sunt, et ad jus fisci pertinent_[k]."

[Footnote k: _Peregrin. de jure fisc._ _l._ 1. _c._ i. _num._ 9.]

FIRST, then, of the royal dignity. Under every monarchical
establishment, it is necessary to distinguish the prince from his
subjects, not only by the outward pomp and decorations of majesty, but
also by ascribing to him certain qualities, as inherent in his royal
capacity, distinct from and superior to those of any other individual
in the nation. For, though a philosophical mind will consider the
royal person merely as one man appointed by mutual consent to preside
over many others, and will pay him that reverence and duty which the
principles of society demand, yet the mass of mankind will be apt to
grow insolent and refractory, if taught to consider their prince as a
man of no greater perfection than themselves. The law therefore
ascribes to the king, in his high political character, not only large
powers and emoluments which form his prerogative and revenue, but
likewise certain attributes of a great and transcendent nature; by
which the people are led to consider him in the light of a superior
being, and to pay him that awful respect, which may enable him with
greater ease to carry on the business of government. This is what I
understand by the royal dignity, the several branches of which we will
now proceed to examine.

I. AND, first, the law ascribes to the king the attribute of
_sovereignty_, or pre-eminence. "_Rex est vicarius_," says Bracton[l],
"_et minister Dei in terra: omnis quidem sub eo est, et ipse sub
nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo._" He is said to have _imperial_ dignity,
and in charters before the conquest is frequently stiled _basileus_
and _imperator_, the titles respectively assumed by the emperors of
the east and west[m]. His realm is declared to be an _empire_, and his
crown imperial, by many acts of parliament, particularly the statutes
24 Hen. VIII. c. 12. and 25 Hen. VIII. c. 28; which at the same time
declare the king to be the supreme head of the realm in matters both
civil and ecclesiastical, and of consequence inferior to no man upon
earth, dependent on no man, accountable to no man. Formerly there
prevailed a ridiculous notion, propagated by the German and Italian
civilians, that an emperor could do many things which a king could
not, (as the creation of notaries and the like) and that all kings
were in some degree subordinate and subject to the emperor of Germany
or Rome. The meaning therefore of the legislature, when it uses these
terms of _empire_ and _imperial_, and applies them to the realm of
England, is only to assert that our king is equally sovereign and
independent within these his dominions, as any emperor is in his
empire; and owes no kind of subjection to any other potentate upon
earth. Hence it is, that no suit or action can be brought against the
king, even in civil matters, because no court can have jurisdiction
over him. For all jurisdiction implies superiority of power: authority
to try would be vain and idle, without an authority to redress; and
the sentence of a court would be contemptible, unless that court had
power to command the execution of it: but who, says Finch[n], shall
command the king? Hence it is likewise, that by law the person of the
king is sacred, even though the measures pursued in his reign be
completely tyrannical and arbitrary: for no jurisdiction upon earth
has power to try him in a criminal way; much less to condemn him to
punishment. If any foreign jurisdiction had this power, as was
formerly claimed by the pope, the independence of the kingdom would be
no more: and, if such a power were vested in any domestic tribunal,
there would soon be an end of the constitution, by destroying the free
agency of one of the constituent parts of the sovereign legislative
power.

[Footnote l: _l._ 1. _c._ 8.]

[Footnote m: Seld. tit. of hon. 1. 2.]

[Footnote n: Finch. L. 83.]

ARE then, it may be asked, the subjects of England totally destitute
of remedy, in case the crown should invade their rights, either by
private injuries, or public oppressions? To this we may answer, that
the law has provided a remedy in both cases.

AND, first, as to private injuries; if any person has, in point of
property, a just demand upon the king, he must petition him in his
court of chancery, where his chancellor will administer right as a
matter of grace, though not upon compulsion[o]. And this is entirely
consonant to what is laid down by the writers on natural law. "A
subject, says Puffendorf[p], so long as he continues a subject, hath
no way to _oblige_ his prince to give him his due, when he refuses it;
though no wise prince will ever refuse to stand to a lawful contract.
And, if the prince gives the subject leave to enter an action against
him, upon such contract, in his own courts, the action itself proceeds
rather upon natural equity, than upon the municipal laws." For the end
of such action is not to _compel_ the prince to observe the contract,
but to _persuade_ him. And, as to personal wrongs; it is well observed
by Mr Locke[q], "the harm which the sovereign can do in his own person
not being likely to happen often, nor to extend itself far; nor being
able by his single strength to subvert the laws, nor oppress the body
of the people, (should any prince have so much weakness and ill nature
as to endeavour to do it)--the inconveniency therefore of some
particular mischiefs, that may happen sometimes, when a heady prince
comes to the throne, are well recompensed by the peace of the public
and security of the government, in the person of the chief magistrate
being thus set out of the reach of danger."

[Footnote o: Finch. L. 255.]

[Footnote p: Law of N. and N. l. 8. c. 10.]

[Footnote q: on Gov. p. 2. §. 205.]

NEXT, as to cases of ordinary public oppression, where the vitals of
the constitution are not attacked, the law hath also assigned a
remedy. For, as a king cannot misuse his power, without the advice of
evil counsellors, and the assistance of wicked ministers, these men
may be examined and punished. The constitution has therefore provided,
by means of indictments, and parliamentary impeachments, that no man
shall dare to assist the crown in contradiction to the laws of the
land. But it is at the same time a maxim in those laws, that the king
himself can do no wrong; since it would be a great weakness and
absurdity in any system of positive law, to define any possible wrong,
without any possible redress.

FOR, as to such public oppressions as tend to dissolve the
constitution, and subvert the fundamentals of government, they are
cases which the law will not, out of decency, suppose; being incapable
of distrusting those, whom it has invested with any part of the
supreme power; since such distrust would render the exercise of that
power precarious and impracticable. For, whereever [Transcriber's
Note: wherever] the law expresses it's distrust of abuse of power, it
always vests a superior coercive authority in some other hand to
correct it; the very notion of which destroys the idea of sovereignty.
If therefore (for example) the two houses of parliament, or either of
them, had avowedly a right to animadvert on the king, or each other,
or if the king had a right to animadvert on either of the houses, that
branch of the legislature, so subject to animadversion, would
instantly cease to be part of the supreme power; the ballance of the
constitution would be overturned; and that branch or branches, in
which this jurisdiction resided, would be completely sovereign. The
supposition of _law_ therefore is, that neither the king nor either
house of parliament (collectively taken) is capable of doing any
wrong; since in such cases the law feels itself incapable of
furnishing any adequate remedy. For which reason all oppressions,
which may happen to spring from any branch of the sovereign power,
must necessarily be out of the reach of any _stated rule_, or
_express legal_ provision: but, if ever they unfortunately happen, the
prudence of the times must provide new remedies upon new emergencies.

INDEED, it is found by experience, that whenever the unconstitutional
oppressions, even of the sovereign power, advance with gigantic
strides and threaten desolation to a state, mankind will not be
reasoned out of the feelings of humanity; nor will sacrifice their
liberty by a scrupulous adherence to those political maxims, which
were originally established to preserve it. And therefore, though the
positive laws are silent, experience will furnish us with a very
remarkable case, wherein nature and reason prevailed. When king James
the second invaded the fundamental constitution of the realm, the
convention declared an abdication, whereby the throne was rendered
vacant, which induced a new settlement of the crown. And so far as
this precedent leads, and no farther, we may now be allowed to lay
down the _law_ of redress against public oppression. If therefore any
future prince should endeavour to subvert the constitution by breaking
the original contract between king and people, should violate the
fundamental laws, and should withdraw himself out of the kingdom; we
are now authorized to declare that this conjunction of circumstances
would amount to an abdication, and the throne would be thereby vacant.
But it is not for us to say, that any one, or two, of these
ingredients would amount to such a situation; for there our precedent
would fail us. In these therefore, or other circumstances, which a
fertile imagination may furnish, since both law and history are
silent, it becomes us to be silent too; leaving to future generations,
whenever necessity and the safety of the whole shall require it, the
exertion of those inherent (though latent) powers of society, which no
climate, no time, no constitution, no contract, can ever destroy or
diminish.

II. BESIDES the attribute of sovereignty, the law also ascribes to the
king, in his political capacity, absolute _perfection_. The king can
do no wrong. Which antient and fundamental maxim is not to be
understood, as if every thing transacted by the government was of
course just and lawful, but means only two things. First, that
whatever is exceptionable in the conduct of public affairs is not to
be imputed to the king, nor is he answerable for it personally to his
people: for this doctrine would totally destroy that constitutional
independence of the crown, which is necessary for the balance of
power, in our free and active, and therefore compounded, constitution.
And, secondly, it means that the prerogative of the crown extends not
to do any injury: it is created for the benefit of the people, and
therefore cannot be exerted to their prejudice[r].

[Footnote r: Plowd. 487.]

THE king, moreover, is not only incapable of _doing_ wrong, but even
of _thinking_ wrong: he can never mean to do an improper thing: in him
is no folly or weakness. And therefore, if the crown should be induced
to grant any franchise or privilege to a subject contrary to reason,
or in any wise prejudicial to the commonwealth, or a private person,
the law will not suppose the king to have meant either an unwise or an
injurious action, but declares that the king was deceived in his
grant; and thereupon such grant is rendered void, merely upon the
foundation of fraud and deception, either by or upon those agents,
whom the crown has thought proper to employ. For the law will not cast
an imputation on that magistrate whom it entrusts with the executive
power, as if he was capable of intentionally disregarding his trust:
but attributes to mere imposition (to which the most perfect of
sublunary beings must still continue liable) those little
inadvertencies, which, if charged on the will of the prince, might
lessen him in the eyes of his subjects.

YET still, notwithstanding this personal perfection, which the law
attributes to the sovereign, the constitution has allowed a latitude
of supposing the contrary, in respect to both houses of parliament;
each of which, in it's turn, hath exerted the right of remonstrating
and complaining to the king even of those acts of royalty, which are
most properly and personally his own; such as messages signed by
himself, and speeches delivered from the throne. And yet, such is the
reverence which is paid to the royal person, that though the two
houses have an undoubted right to consider these acts of state in any
light whatever, and accordingly treat them in their addresses as
personally proceeding from the prince, yet, among themselves, (to
preserve the more perfect decency, and for the greater freedom of
debate) they usually suppose them to flow from the advice of the
administration. But the privilege of canvassing thus freely the
personal acts of the sovereign (either directly, or even through the
medium of his reputed advisers) belongs to no individual, but is
confined to those august assemblies: and there too the objections must
be proposed with the utmost respect and deference. One member was sent
to the tower[s], for suggesting that his majesty's answer to the
address of the commons contained "high words, to fright the members
out of their duty;" and another[t], for saying that a part of the
king's speech "seemed rather to be calculated for the meridian of
Germany than Great Britain."

[Footnote s: Com. Journ. 18 Nov. 1685.]

[Footnote t: Com. Journ. 4 Dec. 1717.]

IN farther pursuance of this principle, the law also determines that
in the king can be no negligence, or _laches_, and therefore no delay
will bar his right. _Nullum tempus occurrit regi_ is the standing
maxim upon all occasions: for the law intends that the king is always
busied for the public good, and therefore has not leisure to assert
his right within the times limited to subjects[u]. In the king also
can be no stain or corruption of blood: for if the heir to the crown
were attainted of treason or felony, and afterwards the crown should
descend to him, this would purge the attainder _ipso facto_[w]. And
therefore when Henry VII, who as earl of Richmond stood attainted,
came to the crown, it was not thought necessary to pass an act of
parliament to reverse this attainder; because, as lord Bacon in his
history of that prince informs us, it was agreed that the assumption
of the crown had at once purged all attainders. Neither can the king
in judgment of law, as king, ever be a minor or under age; and
therefore his royal grants and assents to acts of parliament are good,
though he has not in his natural capacity attained the legal age of
twenty one[x]. By a statute indeed, 28 Hen. VIII. c. 17. power was
given to future kings to rescind and revoke all acts of parliament
that should be made while they were under the age of twenty four: but
this was repealed by the statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 11. so far as related
to that prince; and both statutes are declared to be determined by 24
Geo. II. c. 24. It hath also been usually thought prudent, when the
heir apparent has been very young, to appoint a protector, guardian,
or regent, for a limited time: but the very necessity of such
extraordinary provision is sufficient to demonstrate the truth of that
maxim of the common law, that in the king is no minority; and
therefore he hath no legal guardian[y].

[Footnote u: Finch. L. 82. Co. Litt. 90 _b._]

[Footnote w: Finch. L. 82.]

[Footnote x: Co. Litt. 43.]

[Footnote y: The methods of appointing this guardian or regent have
been so various, and the duration of his power so uncertain, that from
thence alone it may be collected that his office is unknown to the
common law; and therefore (as sir Edward Coke says, 4 Inst. 58.) the
surest way is to have him made by authority of the great council in
parliament. The earl of Pembroke by his own authority assumed, in very
troublesome times, the regency of Henry III, who was then only nine
years old; but was declared of full age by the pope at seventeen,
confirmed the great charter at eighteen, and took upon him the
administration of the government at twenty. A guardian and council of
regency were named for Edward III, by the parliament which deposed his
father; the young king being then fifteen, and not assuming the
government till three years after. When Richard II succeeded at the
age of eleven, the duke of Lancaster took upon him the management of
the kingdom, till the parliament met, which appointed a nominal
council to assist him. Henry V on his death-bed named a regent and a
guardian for his infant son Henry VI, then nine months old: but the
parliament altered his disposition, and appointed a protector and
council, with a special limited authority. Both these princes remained
in a state of pupillage till the age of twenty three. Edward V, at the
age of thirteen, was recommended by his father to the care of the duke
of Glocester; who was declared protector by the privy council. The
statutes 25 Hen. VIII. c. 12. and 28 Hen. VIII. c. 7. provided, that
the successor, if a male and under eighteen, or if a female and under
sixteen, should be till such age in the governance of his or her
natural mother, (if approved by the king) and such other counsellors
as his majesty should by will or otherwise appoint: and he accordingly
appointed his sixteen executors to have the government of his son,
Edward VI, and the kingdom; which executors elected the earl of
Hertford protector. The statute 24 Geo. II. c. 24. in case the crown
should descend to any of the children of Frederick late prince of
Wales under the age of eighteen, appoints the princess dowager;--and
that of 5 Geo. III. c. 27. in case of a like descent to any of his
present majesty's children, empowers the king to name either the
queen, the princess dowager, or any descendant of king George II
residing in this kingdom;--to be guardian and regent, till the
successor attains such age, assisted by a council of regency: the
powers of them all being expressly defined and set down in the several
acts.]

III. A THIRD attribute of the king's majesty is his _perpetuity_. The
law ascribes to him, in his political capacity, an absolute
immortality. The king never dies. Henry, Edward, or George may die;
but the king survives them all. For immediately upon the decease of
the reigning prince in his natural capacity, his kingship or imperial
dignity, by act of law, without any _interregnum_ or interval, is
vested at once in his heir; who is, _eo instanti_, king to all intents
and purposes. And so tender is the law of supposing even a possibility
of his death, that his natural dissolution is generally called his
_demise_; _dimissio regis, vel coronae_: an expression which signifies
merely a transfer of property; for, as is observed in Plowden[z], when
we say the demise of the crown, we mean only that in consequence of
the disunion of the king's body natural from his body politic, the
kingdom is transferred or demised to his successor; and so the royal
dignity remains perpetual. Thus too, when Edward the fourth, in the
tenth year of his reign, was driven from his throne for a few months
by the house of Lancaster, this temporary transfer of his dignity was
denominated his _demise_; and all process was held to be discontinued,
as upon a natural death of the king[a].

[Footnote z: Plowd. 177. 234.]

[Footnote a: M. 49 Hen. VI. pl. 1-8.]

WE are next to consider those branches of the royal prerogative, which
invest this our sovereign lord, thus all-perfect and immortal in his
kingly capacity, with a number of authorities and powers; in the
exertion whereof consists the executive part of government. This is
wisely placed in a single hand by the British constitution, for the
sake of unanimity, strength and dispatch. Were it placed in many
hands, it would be subject to many wills: many wills, if disunited and
drawing different ways, create weakness in a government: and to unite
those several wills, and reduce them to one, is a work of more time
and delay than the exigencies of state will afford. The king of
England is therefore not only the chief, but properly the sole,
magistrate of the nation; all others acting by commission from, and in
due subordination to him: in like manner as, upon the great revolution
in the Roman state, all the powers of the antient magistracy of the
commonwealth were concentred in the new emperor; so that, as
Gravina[b] expresses it, "_in ejus unius persona veteris reipublicae
vis atque majestas per cumulatas magistratuum potestates
exprimebatur_."

[Footnote b: _Orig._ 1. §. 105.]

AFTER what has been premised in this chapter, I shall not (I trust) be
considered as an advocate for arbitrary power, when I lay it down as a
principle, that in the exertion of lawful prerogative, the king is and
ought to be absolute; that is, so far absolute, that there is no legal
authority that can either delay or resist him. He may reject what
bills, may make what treaties, may coin what money, may create what
peers, may pardon what offences he pleases: unless where the
constitution hath expressly, or by evident consequence, laid down some
exception or boundary; declaring, that thus far the prerogative shall
go and no farther. For otherwise the power of the crown would indeed
be but a name and a shadow, insufficient for the ends of government,
if, where it's jurisdiction is clearly established and allowed, any
man or body of men were permitted to disobey it, in the ordinary
course of law: I say, in the _ordinary_ course of law; for I do not
now speak of those _extraordinary_ recourses to first principles,
which are necessary when the contracts of society are in danger of
dissolution, and the law proves too weak a defence against the
violence of fraud or oppression. And yet the want of attending to this
obvious distinction has occasioned these doctrines, of absolute power
in the prince and of national resistance by the people, to be much
misunderstood and perverted by the advocates for slavery on the one
hand, and the demagogues of faction on the other. The former,
observing the absolute sovereignty and transcendent dominion of the
crown laid down (as it certainly is) most strongly and emphatically
in our lawbooks, as well as our homilies, have denied that any case
can be excepted from so general and positive a rule; forgetting how
impossible it is, in any practical system of laws, to point out
beforehand those eccentrical remedies, which the sudden emergence of
national distress may dictate, and which that alone can justify. On
the other hand, over-zealous republicans, feeling the absurdity of
unlimited passive obedience, have fancifully (or sometimes factiously)
gone over to the other extreme: and, because resistance is justifiable
to the person of the prince when the being of the state is endangered,
and the public voice proclaims such resistance necessary, they have
therefore allowed to every individual the right of determining this
expedience, and of employing private force to resist even private
oppression. A doctrine productive of anarchy, and (in consequence)
equally fatal to civil liberty as tyranny itself. For civil liberty,
rightly understood, consists in protecting the rights of individuals
by the united force of society: society cannot be maintained, and of
course can exert no protection, without obedience to some sovereign
power: and obedience is an empty name, if every individual has a right
to decide how far he himself shall obey.

IN the exertion therefore of those prerogatives, which the law has
given him, the king is irresistible and absolute, according to the
forms of the constitution. And yet, if the consequence of that
exertion be manifestly to the grievance or dishonour of the kingdom,
the parliament will call his advisers to a just and severe account.
For prerogative consisting (as Mr Locke[c] has well defined it) in the
discretionary power of acting for the public good, where the positive
laws are silent, if that discretionary power be abused to the public
detriment, such prerogative is exerted in an unconstitutional manner.
Thus the king may make a treaty with a foreign state, which shall
irrevocably bind the nation; and yet, when such treaties have been
judged pernicious, impeachments have pursued those ministers, by whose
agency or advice they were concluded.

[Footnote c: on Gov. 2. §. 166.]

THE prerogatives of the crown (in the sense under which we are now
considering them) respect either this nation's intercourse with
foreign nations, or it's own domestic government and civil polity.

WITH regard to foreign concerns, the king is the delegate or
representative of his people. It is impossible that the individuals of
a state, in their collective capacity, can transact the affairs of
that state with another community equally numerous as themselves.
Unanimity must be wanting to their measures, and strength to the
execution of their counsels. In the king therefore, as in a center,
all the rays of his people are united, and form by that union a
consistency, splendor, and power, that make him feared and respected
by foreign potentates; who would scruple to enter into any
engagements, that must afterwards be revised and ratified by a popular
assembly. What is done by the royal authority, with regard to foreign
powers, is the act of the whole nation: what is done without the
king's concurrence is the act only of private men. And so far is this
point carried by our law, that it hath been held[d], that should all
the subjects of England make war with a king in league with the king
of England, without the royal assent, such war is no breach of the
league. And, by the statute 2 Hen. V. c. 6. any subject committing
acts of hostility upon any nation in league with the king, was
declared to be guilty of high treason: and, though that act was
repealed by the statute 20 Hen. VI. c. 11. so far as relates to the
making this offence high treason, yet still it remains a very great
offence against the law of nations, and punishable by our laws, either
capitally or otherwise, according to the circumstances of the case.

[Footnote d: 4 Inst. 152.]

I. THE king therefore, considered as the representative of his people,
has the sole power of sending embassadors to foreign states, and
receiving embassadors at home. This may lead us into a short enquiry,
how far the municipal laws of England intermeddle with or protect the
rights of these messengers from one potentate to another, whom we call
embassadors.

THE rights, the powers, the duties, and the privileges of embassadors
are determined by the law of nature and nations, and not by any
municipal constitutions. For, as they represent the persons of their
respective masters, who owe no subjection to any laws but those of
their own country, their actions are not subject to the control of the
private law of that state, wherein they are appointed to reside. He
that is subject to the coercion of laws is necessarily dependent on
that power by whom those laws were made: but an embassador ought to be
independent of every power, except that by which he is sent; and of
consequence ought not to be subject to the mere municipal laws of that
nation, wherein he is to exercise his functions. If he grossly
offends, or makes an ill use of his character, he may be sent home and
accused before his master[e]; who is bound either to do justice upon
him, or avow himself the accomplice of his crimes[f]. But there is
great dispute among the writers on the laws of nations, whether this
exemption of embassadors extends to all crimes, as well natural as
positive; or whether it only extends to such as are _mala prohibita_,
as coining, and not to those that are _mala in se_, as murder[g]. Our
law seems to have formerly taken in the restriction, as well as the
general exemption. For it has been held, both by our common lawyers
and civilians[h], that an embassador is privileged by the law of
nature and nations; and yet, if he commits any offence against the law
of reason and nature, he shall lose his privilege[i]: and that
therefore, if an embassador conspires the death of the king in whose
land he is, he may be condemned and executed for treason; but if he
commits any other species of treason, it is otherwise, and he must be
sent to his own kingdom[k]. And these positions seem to be built upon
good appearance of reason. For since, as we have formerly shewn, all
municipal laws act in subordination to the primary law of nature, and,
where they annex a punishment to natural crimes, are only declaratory
of and auxiliary to that law; therefore to this natural, universal
rule of justice embassadors, as well as other men, are subject in all
countries; and of consequence it is reasonable that wherever they
transgress it, there they shall be liable to make atonement[l]. But,
however these principles might formerly obtain, the general practice
of Europe seems now to have adopted the sentiments of the learned
Grotius, that the security of embassadors is of more importance than
the punishment of a particular crime[m]. And therefore few, if any,
examples have happened within a century past, where an embassador has
been punished for any offence, however atrocious in it's nature.

[Footnote e: As was done with count Gyllenberg the Swedish minister to
Great Britain, _A.D._ 1716.]

[Footnote f: Sp. L. 26. 21.]

[Footnote g: Van Leeuwen _in Ff._ 50. 7. 17. Barbeyrac's Puff. l. 8.
c. 9. §. 9. & 17. Van Bynkershoek _de foro legator._ c. 17, 18, 19.]

[Footnote h: 1 Roll. Rep. 175. 3 Bulstr. 27.]

[Footnote i: 4 Inst. 153.]

[Footnote k: 1 Roll. Rep. 185.]

[Footnote l: Foster's reports. 188.]

[Footnote m: _Securitas legatorum utilitati quae ex poena est
praeponderat._ _de jur. b. & p._ 2. 18. 4. 4.]

IN respect to civil suits, all the foreign jurists agree, that neither
an embassador, nor any of his train or _comites_, can be prosecuted
for any debt or contract in the courts of that kingdom wherein he is
sent to reside. Yet sir Edward Coke maintains, that, if an embassador
make a contract which is good _jure gentium_, he shall answer for it
here[n]. And the truth is, we find no traces in our lawbooks of
allowing any privilege to embassadors or their domestics, even in
civil suits, previous to the reign of queen Anne; when an embassador
from Peter the great, czar of Muscovy, was actually arrested and taken
out of his coach in London, in 1708, for debts which he had there
contracted. This the czar resented very highly, and demanded (we are
told) that the officers who made the arrest should be punished with
death. But the queen (to the amazement of that despotic court)
directed her minister to inform him, "that the law of England had not
yet protected embassadors from the payment of their lawful debts; that
therefore the arrest was no offence by the laws; and that she could
inflict no punishment upon any, the meanest, of her subjects, unless
warranted by the law of the land[o]." To satisfy however the clamours
of the foreign ministers (who made it a common cause) as well as to
appease the wrath of Peter[p], a new statute was enacted by
parliament[q], reciting the arrest which had been made, "in contempt
of the protection granted by her majesty, contrary to the law of
nations, and in prejudice of the rights and privileges, which
embassadors and other public ministers have at all times been thereby
possessed of, and ought to be kept sacred and inviolable:" wherefore
it enacts, that for the future all process whereby the person of any
embassador, or of his domestic or domestic servant, may be arrested,
or his goods distreined or seised, shall be utterly null and void; and
the persons prosecuting, soliciting, or executing such process shall
be deemed violaters of the law of nations, and disturbers of the
public repose; and shall suffer such penalties and corporal punishment
as the lord chancellor and the two chief justices, or any two of them,
shall think fit. But it is expressly provided, that no trader, within
the description of the bankrupt laws, who shall be in the service of
any embassador, shall be privileged or protected by this act; nor
shall any one be punished for arresting an embassador's servant,
unless his name be registred with the secretary of state, and by him
transmitted to the sheriffs of London and Middlesex. Exceptions, that
are strictly conformable to the rights of embassadors[r], as observed
in the most civilized countries. And, in consequence of this statute,
thus enforcing the law of nations, these privileges are now usually
allowed in the courts of common law[s].

[Footnote n: 4 Inst. 153.]

[Footnote o: Mod. Un. Hist. xxxv. 454.]

[Footnote p: A copy of the act made upon this occasion, very elegantly
engrossed and illuminated, was sent him to Moscow as a present.]

[Footnote q: 7 Ann. c. 12.]

[Footnote r: _Saepe quaesitum est an comitum numero et jure habendi
sunt, qui legatum comitantur, non ut instructior fiat legatio, sed
unice ut lucro suo consulant, institores forte et mercatores. Et,
quamvis hos saepe defenderint et comitum loco habere voluerint legati,
apparet tamen satis eo non pertinere, qui in legati legationisve
officio non sunt. Quum autem ea res nonnunquam turbas dederit, optimo
exemplo in quibusdam aulis olim receptum fuit, ut legatus teneretur
exhibere nomenclaturam comitum suorum._ Van Bynkersh. _c._ 15. _prope
finem_.]

[Footnote s: Fitzg. 200. Stra. 797.]

II. IT is also the king's prerogative to make treaties, leagues, and
alliances with foreign states and princes. For it is by the law of
nations essential to the goodness of a league, that it be made by the
sovereign power[t]; and then it is binding upon the whole community:
and in England the sovereign power, _quoad hoc_, is vested in the
person of the king. Whatever contracts therefore he engages in, no
other power in the kingdom can legally delay, resist, or annul. And
yet, lest this plenitude of authority should be abused to the
detriment of the public, the constitution (as was hinted before) hath
here interposed a check, by the means of parliamentary impeachment,
for the punishment of such ministers as advise or conclude any treaty,
which shall afterwards be judged to derogate from the honour and
interest of the nation.

[Footnote t: Puff. L. of N. b. 8. c. 9. §. 6.]

III. UPON the same principle the king has also the sole prerogative of
making war and peace. For it is held by all the writers on the law of
nature and nations, that the right of making war, which by nature
subsisted in every individual, is given up by all private persons that
enter into society, and is vested in the sovereign power[u]: and this
right is given up not only by individuals, but even by the intire body
of people, that are under the dominion of a sovereign. It would indeed
be extremely improper, that any number of subjects should have the
power of binding the supreme magistrate, and putting him against his
will in a state of war. Whatever hostilities therefore may be
committed by private citizens, the state ought not to be affected
thereby; unless that should justify their proceedings, and thereby
become partner in the guilt. Such unauthorized voluntiers in violence
are not ranked among open enemies, but are treated like pirates and
robbers: according to that rule of the civil law[w]; _hostes hi sunt
qui nobis, aut quibus nos, publice bellum decrevimus: caeteri latrones
aut praedones sunt_. And the reason which is given by Grotius[x], why
according to the law of nations a denunciation of war ought always to
precede the actual commencement of hostilities, is not so much that
the enemy may be put upon his guard, (which is matter rather of
magnanimity than right) but that it may be certainly clear that the
war is not undertaken by private persons, but by the will of the whole
community; whose right of willing is in this case transferred to the
supreme magistrate by the fundamental laws of society. So that, in
order to make a war completely effectual, it is necessary with us in
England that it be publicly declared and duly proclaimed by the king's
authority; and, then, all parts of both the contending nations, from
the highest to the lowest, are bound by it. And, wherever the right
resides of beginning a national war, there also must reside the right
of ending it, or the power of making peace. And the same check of
parliamentary impeachment, for improper or inglorious conduct, in
beginning, conducting, or concluding a national war, is in general
sufficient to restrain the ministers of the crown from a wanton or
injurious exertion of this great prerogative.

[Footnote u: Puff. l. 8. c. 6. §. 8. and Barbeyr. _in loc._]

[Footnote w: _Ff._ 50. 16. 118.]

[Footnote x: _de jur. b. & p._ _l._ 3. _c._ 3. §. 11.]

IV. BUT, as the delay of making war may sometimes be detrimental to
individuals who have suffered by depredations from foreign potentates,
our laws have in some respect armed the subject with powers to impel
the prerogative; by directing the ministers of the crown to issue
letters of marque and reprisal upon due demand: the prerogative of
granting which is nearly related to, and plainly derived from, that
other of making war; this being indeed only an incomplete state of
hostilities, and generally ending in a formal denunciation of war.
These letters are grantable by the law of nations[y], whenever the
subjects of one state are oppressed and injured by those of another;
and justice is denied by that state to which the oppressor belongs. In
this case letters of marque and reprisal (words in themselves
synonimous and signifying a taking in return) may be obtained, in
order to seise the bodies or goods of the subjects of the offending
state, until satisfaction be made, wherever they happen to be found.
Indeed this custom of reprisals seems dictated by nature herself; and
accordingly we find in the most antient times very notable instances
of it[z]. But here the necessity is obvious of calling in the
sovereign power, to determine when reprisals may be made; else every
private sufferer would be a judge in his own cause. And, in pursuance
of this principle, it is with us declared by the statute 4 Hen. V. c.
7. that, if any subjects of the realm are oppressed in time of truce
by any foreigners, the king will grant marque in due form, to all that
feel themselves grieved. Which form is thus directed to be observed:
the sufferer must first apply to the lord privy-seal, and he shall
make out letters of request under the privy seal; and, if, after such
request of satisfaction made, the party required do not within
convenient time make due satisfaction or restitution to the party
grieved, the lord chancellor shall make him out letters of marque
under the great seal; and by virtue of these he may attack and seise
the property of the aggressor nation, without hazard of being
condemned as a robber or pirate.

[Footnote y: Grot. _de jur. b. & p._ _l._ 3. _c._ 2. §. 4 & 5.]

[Footnote z: See the account given by Nestor, in the eleventh book of
the Iliad, of the reprisals made by himself on the Epeian nation; from
whom he took a multitude of cattle, as a satisfaction for a prize won
at the Elian games by his father Neleus, and for debts due to many
private subjects of the Pylian kingdom: out of which booty the king
took three hundred head of cattle for his own demand, and the rest
were equitably divided among the other creditors.]

V. UPON exactly the same reason stands the prerogative of granting
safe-conducts, without which by the law of nations no member of one
society has a right to intrude into another. And therefore Puffendorf
very justly resolves[a], that it is left in the power of all states,
to take such measures about the admission of strangers, as they think
convenient; those being ever excepted who are driven on the coasts by
necessity, or by any cause that deserves pity or compassion. Great
tenderness is shewn by our laws, not only to foreigners in distress
(as will appear when we come to speak of shipwrecks) but with regard
also to the admission of strangers who come spontaneously. For so long
as their nation continues at peace with ours, and they themselves
behave peaceably, they are under the king's protection; though liable
to be sent home whenever the king sees occasion. But no subject of a
nation at war with us can, by the law of nations, come into the realm,
nor can travel himself upon the high seas, or send his goods and
merchandize from one place to another, without danger of being seized
by our subjects, unless he has letters of safe-conduct; which by
divers antient statutes[b] must be granted under the king's great seal
and inrolled in chancery, or else are of no effect: the king being
supposed the best judge of such emergencies, as may deserve exception
from the general law of arms.

[Footnote a: Law of N. and N. b. 3. c. 3. §. 9.]

[Footnote b: 15 Hen. VI. c. 3. 18 Hen. VI. c. 8. 20 Hen. VI. c. 1.]

INDEED the law of England, as a commercial country, pays a very
particular regard to foreign merchants in innumerable instances. One I
cannot omit to mention: that by _magna carta_[c] it is provided, that
all merchants (unless publickly prohibited beforehand) shall have safe
conduct to depart from, to come into, to tarry in, and to go through
England, for the exercise of merchandize, without any unreasonable
imposts, except in time of war: and, if a war breaks out between us
and their country, they shall be attached (if in England) without harm
of body or goods, till the king or his chief justiciary be informed
how our merchants are treated in the land with which we are at war;
and, if ours be secure in that land, they shall be secure in ours.
This seems to have been a common rule of equity among all the northern
nations; for we learn from Stiernhook[d], that it was a maxim among
the Goths and Swedes, "_quam legem exteri nobis posuere, eandem illis
ponemus_." But it is somewhat extraordinary, that it should have found
a place in _magna carta_, a mere interior treaty between the king and
his natural-born subjects; which occasions the learned Montesquieu to
remark with a degree of admiration, "that the English have made the
protection of _foreign_ merchants one of the articles of their
_national_ liberty[e]." But indeed it well justifies another
observation which he has made[f], "that the English know better than
any other people upon earth, how to value at the same time these three
great advantages, religion, liberty, and commerce." Very different
from the genius of the Roman people; who in their manners, their
constitution, and even in their laws, treated commerce as a
dishonorable employment, and prohibited the exercise thereof to
persons of birth, or rank, or fortune[g]: and equally different from
the bigotry of the canonists, who looked on trade as inconsistent with
christianity[h], and determined at the council of Melfi, under pope
Urban II, _A.D._ 1090, that it was impossible with a safe conscience
to exercise any traffic, or follow the profession of the law[i].

[Footnote c: _c._ 30.]

[Footnote d: _de jure Sueon._ _l._ 3. _c._ 4.]

[Footnote e: Sp. L. 20. 13.]

[Footnote f: Sp. L. 20. 6.]

[Footnote g: _Nobiliores natalibus, et honorum luce conspicuos, et
patrimonio ditiores, perniciosum urbibus mercimonium exercere
prohibemus._ _C._ 4 63. 3.]

[Footnote h: _Homo mercator vix aut nunquam potest Deo placere: et
ideo nullus Christianus debet esse mercator; aut si voluerit esse,
projiciatur de ecclesia Dei._ _Decret._ 1. 88. 11.]

[Footnote i: _Falsa fit poenitentia [laici] cum penitus ab officio
curiali vel negotiali non recedit, quae sine peccatis agi ulla ratione
non praevalet._ _Act. Concil. apud Baron._ _c._ 16.]

THESE are the principal prerogatives of the king, respecting this
nation's intercourse with foreign nations; in all of which he is
considered as the delegate or representative of his people. But in
domestic affairs he is considered in a great variety of characters,
and from thence there arises an abundant number of other prerogatives.

I. FIRST, he is a constituent part of the supreme legislative power;
and, as such, has the prerogative of rejecting such provisions in
parliament, as he judges improper to be passed. The expediency of
which constitution has before been evinced at large[k]. I shall only
farther remark, that the king is not bound by any act of parliament,
unless he be named therein by special and particular words. The most
general words that can be devised ("any person or persons, bodies
politic, or corporate, _&c._") affect not him in the least, if they
may tend to restrain or diminish any of his rights or interests[l].
For it would be of most mischievous consequence to the public, if the
strength of the executive power were liable to be curtailed without
it's own express consent, by constructions and implications of the
subject. Yet where an act of parliament is expressly made for the
preservation of public rights and the suppression of public wrongs,
and does not interfere with the established rights of the crown, it is
said to be binding as well upon the king as upon the subject[m]: and,
likewise, the king may take the benefit of any particular act, though
he be not especially named[n].

[Footnote k: ch. 2. pag. 149.]

[Footnote l: 11 Rep. 74 _b._]

[Footnote m: 11 Rep. 71.]

[Footnote n: 7 Rep. 32.]

II. THE king is considered, in the next place, as the generalissimo,
or the first in military command, within the kingdom. The great end of
society is to protect the weakness of individuals by the united
strength of the community: and the principal use of government is to
direct that united strength in the best and most effectual manner, to
answer the end proposed. Monarchical government is allowed to be the
fittest of any for this purpose: it follows therefore, from the very
end of it's institution, that in a monarchy the military power must be
trusted in the hands of the prince.

IN this capacity therefore, of general of the kingdom, the king has
the sole power of raising and regulating fleets and armies. Of the
manner in which they are raised and regulated I shall speak more, when
I come to consider the military state. We are now only to consider the
prerogative of enlisting and of governing them: which indeed was
disputed and claimed, contrary to all reason and precedent, by the
long parliament of king Charles I; but, upon the restoration of his
son, was solemnly declared by the statute 13 Car. II. c. 6. to be in
the king alone: for that the sole supreme government and command of
the militia within all his majesty's realms and dominions, and of all
forces by sea and land, and of all forts and places of strength, ever
was and is the undoubted right of his majesty, and his royal
predecessors, kings and queens of England; and that both or either
house of parliament cannot, nor ought to, pretend to the same.

THIS statute, it is obvious to observe, extends not only to fleets and
armies, but also to forts, and other places of strength, within the
realm; the sole prerogative as well of erecting, as manning and
governing of which, belongs to the king in his capacity of general of
the kingdom[o]: and all lands were formerly subject to a tax, for
building of castles wherever the king thought proper. This was one of
the three things, from contributing to the performance of which no
lands were exempted; and therefore called by our Saxon ancestors the
_trinoda necessitas: sc. pontis reparatio, arcis constructio, et
expeditio contra hostem_[p]. And this they were called upon to do so
often, that, as sir Edward Coke from M. Paris assures us[q], there
were in the time of Henry II 1115 castles subsisting in England. The
inconvenience of which, when granted out to private subjects, the
lordly barons of those times, was severely felt by the whole kingdom;
for, as William of Newbury remarks in the reign of king Stephen,
"_erant in Anglia quodammodo tot reges vel potius tyranni, quot domini
castellorum_:" but it was felt by none more sensibly than by two
succeeding princes, king John and king Henry III. And therefore, the
greatest part of them being demolished in the barons' wars, the kings
of after times have been very cautious of suffering them to be rebuilt
in a fortified manner: and sir Edward Coke lays it down[r], that no
subject can build a castle, or house of strength imbatteled, or other
fortress defensible, without the licence of the king; for the danger
which might ensue, if every man at his pleasure might do it.

[Footnote o: 2 Inst. 30.]

[Footnote p: Cowel's interpr. _tit. castellorum operatio_. Seld. _Jan.
Angl._ 1. 42.]

[Footnote q: 2 Inst. 31.]

[Footnote r: 1 Inst. 5.]

TO this branch of the prerogative may be referred the power vested in
his majesty, by statutes 12 Car. II. c. 4. and 29 Geo. II. c. 16. of
prohibiting the exportation of arms or ammunition out of this kingdom,
under severe penalties: and likewise the right which the king has,
whenever he sees proper, of confining his subjects to stay within the
realm, or of recalling them when beyond the seas. By the common
law[s], every man may go out of the realm for whatever cause he
pleaseth, without obtaining the king's leave; provided he is under no
injunction of staying at home: (which liberty was expressly declared
in king John's great charter, though left out in that of Henry III)
but, because that every man ought of right to defend the king and his
realm, therefore the king at his pleasure may command him by his writ
that he go not beyond the seas, or out of the realm without licence;
and if he do the contrary, he shall be punished for disobeying the
king's command. Some persons there antiently were, that, by reason of
their stations, were under a perpetual prohibition of going abroad
without licence obtained; among which were reckoned all peers, on
account of their being counsellors of the crown; all knights, who were
bound to defend the kingdom from invasions; all ecclesiastics, who
were expressly confined by cap. 4. of the constitutions of Clarendon,
on account of their attachment in the times of popery to the see of
Rome; all archers and other artificers, lest they should instruct
foreigners to rival us in their several trades and manufactures. This
was law in the times of Britton[t], who wrote in the reign of Edward
I: and sir Edward Coke[u] gives us many instances to this effect in
the time of Edward III. In the succeeding reign the affair of
travelling wore a very different aspect: an act of parliament being
made[w], forbidding all persons whatever to go abroad without licence;
_except_ only the lords and other great men of the realm; and true and
notable merchants; and the king's soldiers. But this act was repealed
by the statute 4 Jac. I. c. 1. And at present every body has, or at
least assumes, the liberty of going abroad when he pleases. Yet
undoubtedly if the king, by writ of _ne exeat regnum_, under his great
seal or privy seal, thinks proper to prohibit him from so doing; or if
the king sends a writ to any man, when abroad, commanding his return;
and in either case the subject disobeys; it is a high contempt of the
king's prerogative, for which the offender's lands shall be seised
till he return; and then he is liable to fine and imprisonment[x].

[Footnote s: F.N.B. 85.]

[Footnote t: c. 123.]

[Footnote u: 3 Inst. 175.]

[Footnote w: 5 Ric. II. c. 2.]

[Footnote x: 1 Hawk. P.C. 22.]

III. ANOTHER capacity, in which the king is considered in domestic
affairs, is as the fountain of justice and general conservator of the
peace of the kingdom. By the fountain of justice the law does not mean
the _author_ or _original_, but only the _distributor_. Justice is not
derived from the king, as from his _free gift_; but he is the steward
of the public, to dispense it to whom it is _due_[y]. He is not the
spring, but the reservoir; from whence right and equity are conducted,
by a thousand chanels, to every individual. The original power of
judicature, by the fundamental principles of society, is lodged in the
society at large: but as it would be impracticable to render complete
justice to every individual, by the people in their collective
capacity, therefore every nation has committed that power to certain
select magistrates, who with more ease and expedition can hear and
determine complaints; and in England this authority has immemorially
been exercised by the king or his substitutes. He therefore has alone
the right of erecting courts of judicature: for, though the
constitution of the kingdom hath entrusted him with the whole
executive power of the laws, it is impossible, as well as improper,
that he should personally carry into execution this great and
extensive trust: it is consequently necessary, that courts should be
erected, to assist him in executing this power; and equally necessary,
that, if erected, they should be erected by his authority. And hence
it is, that all jurisdictions of courts are either mediately or
immediately derived from the crown, their proceedings run generally in
the king's name, they pass under his seal, and are executed by his
officers.

[Footnote y: _Ad hoc autem creatus est et electus, ut justitiam faciat
universis._ Bract. _l._ 3. _tr._ 1. _c._ 9.]

IT is probable, and almost certain, that in very early times, before
our constitution arrived at it's full perfection, our kings in person
often heard and determined causes between party and party. But at
present, by the long and uniform usage of many ages, our kings have
delegated their whole judicial power to the judges of their several
courts; which are the grand depositary of the fundamental laws of the
kingdom, and have gained a known and stated jurisdiction, regulated by
certain and established rules, which the crown itself cannot now alter
but by act of parliament[z]. And, in order to maintain both the
dignity and independence of the judges in the superior courts, it is
enacted by the statute 13 W. III. c. 2. that their commissions shall
be made (not, as formerly, _durante bene placito_, but) _quamdiu bene
se gesserint_, and their salaries ascertained and established; but
that it may be lawful to remove them on the address of both houses of
parliament. And now, by the noble improvements of that law in the
statute of 1 Geo. III. c. 23. enacted at the earnest recommendation of
the king himself from the throne, the judges are continued in their
offices during their good behaviour, notwithstanding any demise of the
crown (which was formerly held[a] immediately to vacate their seats)
and their full salaries are absolutely secured to them during the
continuance of their commissions: his majesty having been pleased to
declare, that "he looked upon the independence and uprightness of the
judges, as essential to the impartial administration of justice; as
one of the best securities of the rights and liberties of his
subjects; and as most conducive to the honour of the crown[b]."

[Footnote z: 2 Hawk. P.C. 2.]

[Footnote a: Ld Raym. 747.]

[Footnote b: Com. Journ. 3 Mar. 1761.]

IN criminal proceedings, or prosecutions for offences, it would still
be a higher absurdity, if the king personally sate in judgment;
because in regard to these he appears in another capacity, that of
_prosecutor_. All offences are either against the king's peace, or his
crown and dignity; and are so laid in every indictment. For, though in
their consequences they generally seem (except in the case of treason
and a very few others) to be rather offences against the kingdom than
the king; yet, as the public, which is an invisible body, has
delegated all it's power and rights, with regard to the execution of
the laws, to one visible magistrate, all affronts to that power, and
breaches of those rights, are immediately offences against him, to
whom they are so delegated by the public. He is therefore the proper
person to prosecute for all public offences and breaches of the peace,
being the person injured in the eye of the law. And this notion was
carried so far in the old Gothic constitution, (wherein the king was
bound by his coronation oath to conserve the peace) that in case of
any forcible injury offered to the person of a fellow subject, the
offender was accused of a kind of perjury, in having violated the
king's coronation oath; _dicebatur fregisse juramentum regis
juratum_[c]. And hence also arises another branch of the prerogative,
that of _pardoning_ offences; for it is reasonable that he only who is
injured should have the power of forgiving. And therefore, in
parliamentary impeachments, the king has no prerogative of pardoning:
because there the commons of Great Britain are in their own names the
prosecutors, and not the crown; the offence being for the most part
avowedly taken to be done against the public. Of prosecutions and
pardons I shall treat more at large hereafter; and only mention them
here, in this cursory manner, to shew the constitutional grounds of
this power of the crown, and how regularly connected all the links are
in this vast chain of prerogative.

[Footnote c: Stiernh. _de jure Goth._ _l._ 3. _c._ 3. A notion
somewhat similar to this may be found in the mirrour. c. 1. §. 5.]

IN this distinct and separate existence of the judicial power, in a
peculiar body of men, nominated indeed, but not removeable at
pleasure, by the crown, consists one main preservative of the public
liberty; which cannot subsist long in any state, unless the
administration of common justice be in some degree separated both from
the legislative and also from the executive power. Were it joined with
the legislative, the life, liberty, and property, of the subject would
be in the hands of arbitrary judges, whose decisions would be then
regulated only by their own opinions, and not by any fundamental
principles of law; which, though legislators may depart from, yet
judges are bound to observe. Were it joined with the executive, this
union might soon be an over-ballance for the legislative. For which
reason, by the statute of 16 Car. I. c. 10. which abolished the court
of star chamber, effectual care is taken to remove all judicial power
out of the hands of the king's privy council; who, as then was evident
from recent instances, might soon be inclined to pronounce that for
law, which was most agreeable to the prince or his officers. Nothing
therefore is more to be avoided, in a free constitution, than uniting
the provinces of a judge and a minister of state. And indeed, that the
absolute power, claimed and exercised in a neighbouring nation, is
more tolerable than that of the eastern empires, is in great measure
owing to their having vested the judicial power in their parliaments,
a body separate and distinct from both the legislative and executive:
and, if ever that nation recovers it's former liberty, it will owe it
to the efforts of those assemblies. In Turkey, where every thing is
centered in the sultan or his ministers, despotic power is in it's
meridian, and wears a more dreadful aspect.

A CONSEQUENCE of this prerogative is the legal _ubiquity_ of the king.
His majesty, in the eye of the law, is always present in all his
courts, though he cannot personally distribute justice[d]. His judges
are the mirror by which the king's image is reflected. It is the regal
office, and not the royal person, that is always present in court,
always ready to undertake prosecutions, or pronounce judgment, for the
benefit and protection of the subject. And from this ubiquity it
follows, that the king can never be nonsuit[e]; for a nonsuit is the
desertion of the suit or action by the non-appearance of the plaintiff
in court. For the same reason also, in the forms of legal proceedings,
the king is not said to appear _by his attorney_, as other men do; for
he always appears in contemplation of law in his own proper person[f].

[Footnote d: Fortesc. c. 8. 2 Inst. 186.]

[Footnote e: Co. Litt. 139.]

[Footnote f: Finch. L. 81.]

FROM the same original, of the king's being the fountain of justice,
we may also deduce the prerogative of issuing proclamations, which is
vested in the king alone. These proclamations have then a binding
force, when (as Sir Edward Coke observes[g]) they are grounded upon
and enforce the laws of the realm. For, though the making of laws is
entirely the work of a distinct part, the legislative branch, of the
sovereign power, yet the manner, time, and circumstances of putting
those laws in execution must frequently be left to the discretion of
the executive magistrate. And therefore his constitutions or edicts,
concerning these points, which we call proclamations, are binding upon
the subject, where they do not either contradict the old laws, or tend
to establish new ones; but only enforce the execution of such laws as
are already in being, in such manner as the king shall judge
necessary. Thus the established law is, that the king may prohibit any
of his subjects from leaving the realm: a proclamation therefore
forbidding this in general for three weeks, by laying an embargo upon
all shipping in time of war[h], will be equally binding as an act of
parliament, because founded upon a prior law. A proclamation for
disarming papists is also binding, being only in execution of what the
legislature has first ordained: but a proclamation for allowing arms
to papists, or for disarming any protestant subjects, will not bind;
because the first would be to assume a dispensing power, the latter a
legislative one; to the vesting of either of which in any single
person the laws of England are absolutely strangers. Indeed by the
statute 31 Hen. VIII. c. 8. it was enacted, that the king's
proclamations should have the force of acts of parliament: a statute,
which was calculated to introduce the most despotic tyranny; and which
must have proved fatal to the liberties of this kingdom, had it not
been luckily repealed in the minority of his successor, about five
years after[i].

[Footnote g: 3 Inst. 162.]

[Footnote h: 4 Mod. 177, 179.]

[Footnote i: Stat. 1 Edw. VI. c. 12.]

IV. THE king is likewise the fountain of honour, of office, and of
privilege: and this in a different sense from that wherein he is
stiled the fountain of justice; for here he is really the parent of
them. It is impossible that government can be maintained without a
due subordination of rank; that the people may know and distinguish
such as are set over them, in order to yield them their due respect
and obedience; and also that the officers themselves, being encouraged
by emulation and the hopes of superiority, may the better discharge
their functions: and the law supposes, that no one can be so good a
judge of their several merits and services, as the king himself who
employs them. It has therefore intrusted with him the sole power of
conferring dignities and honours, in confidence that he will bestow
them upon none, but such as deserve them. And therefore all degrees of
nobility, of knighthood, and other titles, are received by immediate
grant from the crown: either expressed in writing, by writs or letters
patent, as in the creations of peers and baronets; or by corporeal
investiture, as in the creation of a simple knight.

FROM the same principle also arises the prerogative of erecting and
disposing of offices: for honours and offices are in their nature
convertible and synonymous. All offices under the crown carry in the
eye of the law an honour along with them; because they imply a
superiority of parts and abilities, being supposed to be always filled
with those that are most able to execute them. And, on the other hand,
all honours in their original had duties or offices annexed to them:
an earl, _comes_, was the conservator or governor of a county; and a
knight, _miles_, was bound to attend the king in his wars. For the
same reason therefore that honours are in the disposal of the king,
offices ought to be so likewise; and as the king may create new
titles, so may he create new offices: but with this restriction, that
he cannot create new offices with new fees annexed to them, nor annex
new fees to old offices; for this would be a tax upon the subject,
which cannot be imposed but by act of parliament[k]. Wherefore, in 13
Hen. IV, a new office being created by the king's letters patent for
measuring cloths, with a new fee for the same, the letters patent
were, on account of the new fee, revoked and declared void in
parliament.

[Footnote k: 2 Inst. 533.]

UPON the same, or a like reason, the king has also the prerogative of
conferring privileges upon private persons. Such as granting place or
precedence to any of his subjects, as shall seem good to his royal
wisdom[l]: or such as converting aliens, or persons born out of the
king's dominions, into denizens; whereby some very considerable
privileges of natural-born subjects are conferred upon them. Such also
is the prerogative of erecting corporations; whereby a number of
private persons are united and knit together, and enjoy many
liberties, powers, and immunities in their politic capacity, which
they were utterly incapable of in their natural. Of aliens, denizens,
natural-born, and naturalized subjects, I shall speak more largely in
a subsequent chapter; as also of corporations at the close of this
book of our commentaries. I now only mention them incidentally, in
order to remark the king's prerogative of making them; which is
grounded upon this foundation, that the king, having the sole
administration of the government in his hands, is the best and the
only judge, in what capacities, with what privileges, and under what
distinctions, his people are the best qualified to serve, and to act
under him. A principle, which was carried so far by the imperial law,
that it was determined to be the crime of sacrilege, even to doubt
whether the prince had appointed proper officers in the state[m].

[Footnote l: 4 Inst. 361.]

[Footnote m: _Disputare de principali judicio non oportet: sacrilegii
enim instar est, dubitare an is dignus sit; quem elegerit imperator._
_C._ 9. 29. 3.]

V. ANOTHER light in which the laws of England consider the king with
regard to domestic concerns, is as the arbiter of commerce. By
commerce, I at present mean domestic commerce only. It would lead me
into too large a field, if I were to attempt, to enter upon the nature
of foreign trade, it's privileges, regulations, and restrictions; and
would be also quite beside the purpose of these commentaries, which
are confined to the laws of England. Whereas no municipal laws can be
sufficient to order and determine the very extensive and complicated
affairs of traffic and merchandize; neither can they have a proper
authority for this purpose. For as these are transactions carried on
between the subjects of independent states, the municipal laws of one
will not be regarded by the other. For which reason the affairs of
commerce are regulated by a law of their own, called the law merchant
or _lex mercatoria_, which all nations agree in and take notice of.
And in particular the law of England does in many cases refer itself
to it, and leaves the causes of merchants to be tried by their own
peculiar customs; and that often even in matters relating to inland
trade, as for instance with regard to the drawing, the acceptance, and
the transfer, of bills of exchange[n].

[Footnote n: Co. Litt. 172. Ld Raym. 181. 1542.]

WITH us in England, the king's prerogative, so far as it relates to
mere domestic commerce, will fall principally under the following
articles:

FIRST, the establishment of public marts, or places of buying and
selling, such as markets and fairs, with the tolls thereunto
belonging. These can only be set up by virtue of the king's grant, or
by long and immemorial usage and prescription, which presupposes such
a grant[o]. The limitation of these public resorts, to such time and
such place as may be most convenient for the neighbourhood, forms a
part of oeconomics, or domestic polity; which, considering the kingdom
as a large family, and the king as the master of it, he clearly has a
right to dispose and order as he pleases.

[Footnote o: 2 Inst. 220.]

SECONDLY, the regulation of weights and measures. These, for the
advantage of the public, ought to be universally the same throughout
the kingdom; being the general criterions which reduce all things to
the same or an equivalent value. But, as weight and measure are things
in their nature arbitrary and uncertain, it is therefore expedient
that they be reduced to some fixed rule or standard: which standard it
is impossible to fix by any written law or oral proclamation; for no
man can, by words only, give another an adequate idea of a foot-rule,
or a pound-weight. It is therefore necessary to have recourse to some
visible, palpable, material standard; by forming a comparison with
which, all weights and measures may be reduced to one uniform size:
and the prerogative of fixing this standard, our antient law vested in
the crown; as in Normandy it belonged to the duke[p]. This standard
was originally kept at Winchester: and we find in the laws of king
Edgar[q], near a century before the conquest, an injunction that the
one measure, which was kept at Winchester, should be observed
throughout the realm. Most nations have regulated the standard of
measures of length by comparison with the parts of the human body; as
the palm, the hand, the span, the foot, the cubit, the ell, (_ulna_,
or arm) the pace, and the fathom. But, as these are of different
dimensions in men of different proportions, our antient historians[r]
inform us, that a new standard of longitudinal measure was ascertained
by king Henry the first; who commanded that the _ulna_ or antient ell,
which answers to the modern yard, should be made of the exact length
of his own arm. And, one standard of measures of length being gained,
all others are easily derived from thence; those of greater length by
multiplying, those of less by subdividing, that original standard.
Thus, by the statute called _compositio ulnarum et perticarum_, five
yards and an half make a perch; and the yard is subdivided into three
feet, and each foot into twelve inches; which inches will be each of
the length of three grains of barley. Superficial measures are derived
by squaring those of length; and measures of capacity by cubing them.
The standard of weights was originally taken from corns of wheat,
whence the lowest denomination of weights we have is still called a
grain; thirty two of which are directed, by the statute called
_compositio mensurarum_, to compose a penny weight, whereof twenty
make an ounce, twelve ounces a pound, and so upwards. And upon these
principles the first standards were made; which, being originally so
fixed by the crown, their subsequent regulations have been generally
made by the king in parliament. Thus, under king Richard I, in his
parliament holden at Westminster, _A.D._ 1197, it was ordained that
there shall be only one weight and one measure throughout the kingdom,
and that the custody of the assise or standard of weights and measures
shall be committed to certain persons in every city and borough[s];
from whence the antient office of the king's aulnager seems to have
been derived, whose duty it was, for a certain fee, to measure all
cloths made for sale, till the office was abolished by the statute 11
& 12 W. III. c. 20. In king John's time this ordinance of king Richard
was frequently dispensed with for money[t]; which occasioned a
provision to be made for inforcing it, in the great charters of king
John and his son[u]. These original standards were called _pondus
regis_[w], and _mensura domini regis_[x]; and are directed by a
variety of subsequent statutes to be kept in the exchequer, and all
weights and measures to be made conformable thereto[y]. But, as sir
Edward Coke observes[z], though this hath so often by authority of
parliament been enacted, yet it could never be effected; so forcible
is custom with the multitude, when it hath gotten an head.

[Footnote p: _Gr. Coustum._ _c._ 16.]

[Footnote q: _cap._ 8.]

[Footnote r: William of Malmsb. _in vita Hen. I._ Spelm. _Hen. I. ap._
Wilkins. 299.]

[Footnote s: Hoved. Matth. Paris.]

[Footnote t: Hoved. _A.D._ 1201.]

[Footnote u: 9 Hen. III. c. 25.]

[Footnote w: _Plac. 35 Edw. I. apud_ Cowel's Interpr. _tit. pondus
regis._]

[Footnote x: _Flet._ 2. 12.]

[Footnote y: 14 Edw. III. st. 1. c. 12. 25 Edw. III. st. 5. c. 10. 16
Ric. II. c. 3. 8 Hen. VI. c. 5. 11 Hen. VI. c. 8. 11 Hen. VII. c. 4.
22 Car. II. c. 8.]

[Footnote z: 2 Inst. 41.]

THIRDLY, as money is the medium of commerce, it is the king's
prerogative, as the arbiter of domestic commerce, to give it authority
or make it current. Money is an universal medium, or common standard,
by comparison with which the value of all merchandize may be
ascertained: or it is a sign, which represents the respective values
of all commodities. Metals are well calculated for this sign, because
they are durable and are capable of many subdivisions: and a precious
metal is still better calculated for this purpose, because it is the
most portable. A metal is also the most proper for a common measure,
because it can easily be reduced to the same standard in all nations:
and every particular nation fixes on it it's own impression, that the
weight and standard (wherein consists the intrinsic value) may both
be known by inspection only.

AS the quantity of precious metals increases, that is, the more of
them there is extracted from the mine, this universal medium or common
sign will sink in value, and grow less precious. Above a thousand
millions of bullion are calculated to have been imported into Europe
from America within less than three centuries; and the quantity is
daily increasing. The consequence is, that more money must be given
now for the same commodity than was given an hundred years ago. And,
if any accident was to diminish the quantity of gold and silver, their
value would proportionably rise. A horse, that was formerly worth ten
pounds, is now perhaps worth twenty; and, by any failure of current
specie, the price may be reduced to what it was. Yet is the horse in
reality neither dearer nor cheaper at one time than another: for, if
the metal which constitutes the coin was formerly twice as scarce as
at present, the commodity was then as dear at half the price, as now
it is at the whole.

THE coining of money is in all states the act of the sovereign power;
for the reason just mentioned, that it's value may be known on
inspection. And with respect to coinage in general, there are three
things to be considered therein; the materials, the impression, and
the denomination.

WITH regard to the materials, sir Edward Coke lays it down[a], that
the money of England must either be of gold or silver; and none other
was ever issued by the royal authority till 1672, when copper
farthings and half-pence were coined by king Charles the second, and
ordered by proclamation to be current in all payments, under the value
of six-pence, and not otherwise. But this copper coin is not upon the
same footing with the other in many respects, particularly with regard
to the offence of counterfeiting it.

[Footnote a: 2 Inst. 577.]

AS to the impression, the stamping thereof is the unquestionable
prerogative of the crown: for, though divers bishops and monasteries
had formerly the privilege of coining money, yet, as sir Matthew Hale
observes[b], this was usually done by special grant from the king, or
by prescription which supposes one; and therefore was derived from,
and not in derogation of, the royal prerogative. Besides that they had
only the profit of the coinage, and not the power of instituting
either the impression or denomination; but had usually the stamp sent
them from the exchequer.

[Footnote b: 1 Hist. P.C. 191.]

THE denomination, or the value for which the coin is to pass current,
is likewise in the breast of the king; and, if any unusual pieces are
coined, that value must be ascertained by proclamation. In order to
fix the value, the weight, and the fineness of the metal are to be
taken into consideration together. When a given weight of gold or
silver is of a given fineness, it is then of the true standard, and
called sterling metal; a name for which there are various reasons
given[c], but none of them entirely satisfactory. And of this sterling
metal all the coin of the kingdom must be made by the statute 25 Edw.
III. c. 13. So that the king's prerogative seemeth not to extend to
the debasing or inhancing the value of the coin, below or above the
sterling value[d]: though sir Matthew Hale[e] appears to be of another
opinion. The king may also, by his proclamation, legitimate foreign
coin, and make it current here; declaring at what value it shall be
taken in payments[f]. But this, I apprehend, ought to be by comparison
with the standard of our own coin; otherwise the consent of parliament
will be necessary. There is at present no such legitimated money;
Portugal coin being only current by private consent, so that any one
who pleases may refuse to take it in payment. The king may also at any
time decry, or cry down, any coin of the kingdom, and make it no
longer current[g].

[Footnote c: Spelm. Gloss. 203.]

[Footnote d: 2 Inst. 577.]

[Footnote e: 1 H.P.C. 194.]

[Footnote f: _Ibid._ 197.]

[Footnote g: _Ibid._]

VI. THE king is, lastly, considered by the laws of England as the head
and supreme governor of the national church.

TO enter into the reasons upon which this prerogative is founded is
matter rather of divinity than of law. I shall therefore only observe
that by statute 26 Hen. VIII. c. 1. (reciting that the king's majesty
justly and rightfully is and ought to be the supreme head of the
church of England; and so had been recognized by the clergy of this
kingdom in their convocation) it is enacted, that the king shall be
reputed the only supreme head in earth of the church of England, and
shall have, annexed to the imperial crown of this realm, as well the
titles and stile thereof, as all jurisdictions, authorities, and
commodities, to the said dignity of supreme head of the church
appertaining. And another statute to the same purport was made, 1
Eliz. c. 1.

IN virtue of this authority the king convenes, prorogues, restrains,
regulates, and dissolves all ecclesiastical synods or convocations.
This was an inherent prerogative of the crown, long before the time of
Henry VIII, as appears by the statute 8 Hen. VI. c. 1. and the many
authors, both lawyers and historians, vouched by sir Edward Coke[h].
So that the statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 19. which restrains the
convocation from making or putting in execution any canons repugnant
to the king's prerogative, or the laws, customs, and statutes of the
realm, was merely declaratory of the old common law: that part of it
only being new, which makes the king's royal assent actually necessary
to the validity of every canon. The convocation or ecclesiastical
synod, in England, differs considerably in it's constitution from the
synods of other christian kingdoms: those consisting wholly of
bishops; whereas with us the convocation is the miniature of a
parliament, wherein the archbishop presides with regal state; the
upper house of bishops represents the house of lords; and the lower
house, composed of representatives of the several dioceses at large,
and of each particular chapter therein, resembles the house of
commons with it's knights of the shire and burgesses[i]. This
constitution is said to be owing to the policy of Edward I; who
thereby at one and the same time let in the inferior clergy to the
privilege of forming ecclesiastical canons, (which before they had
not) and also introduced a method of taxing ecclesiastical benefices,
by consent of convocation[k].

[Footnote h: 4 Inst. 322, 323.]

[Footnote i: In the diet of Sweden, where the ecclesiastics form one
of the branches of the legislature, the chamber of the clergy
resembles the convocation of England. It is composed of the bishops
and superintendants; and also of deputies, one of which is chosen by
every ten parishes or rural deanry. Mod. Un. Hist. xxxiii. 18.]

[Footnote k: Gilb. hist. of exch. c. 4.]

FROM this prerogative also of being the head of the church arises the
king's right of nomination to vacant bishopricks, and certain other
ecclesiastical preferments; which will better be considered when we
come to treat of the clergy. I shall only here observe, that this is
now done in consequence of the statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 20.

AS head of the church, the king is likewise the _dernier resort_ in
all ecclesiastical causes; an appeal lying ultimately to him in
chancery from the sentence of every ecclesiastical judge: which right
was restored to the crown by statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 19. as will more
fully be shewn hereafter.




CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.

OF THE KING'S REVENUE.


HAVING, in the preceding chapter, considered at large those branches
of the king's prerogative, which contribute to his royal dignity, and
constitute the executive power of the government, we proceed now to
examine the king's _fiscal_ prerogatives, or such as regard his
_revenue_; which the British constitution hath vested in the royal
person, in order to support his dignity and maintain his power: being
a portion which each subject contributes of his property, in order to
secure the remainder.

THIS revenue is either ordinary, or extraordinary. The king's ordinary
revenue is such, as has either subsisted time out of mind in the
crown; or else has been granted by parliament, by way of purchase or
exchange for such of the king's inherent hereditary revenues, as were
found inconvenient to the subject.

WHEN I say that it has subsisted time out of mind in the crown, I do
not mean that the king is at present in the actual possession of the
whole of this revenue. Much (nay, the greatest part) of it is at this
day in the hands of subjects; to whom it has been granted out from
time to time by the kings of England: which has rendered the crown in
some measure dependent on the people for it's ordinary support and
subsistence. So that I must be obliged to recount, as part of the
royal revenue, what lords of manors and other subjects frequently
look upon to be their own absolute rights, because they are and have
been vested in them and their ancestors for ages, though in reality
originally derived from the grants of our antient princes.

I. THE first of the king's ordinary revenues, which I shall take
notice of, is of an ecclesiastical kind; (as are also the three
succeeding ones) viz. the custody of the temporalties of bishops; by
which are meant all the lay revenues, lands, and tenements (in which
is included his barony) which belong to an archbishop's or bishop's
see. And these upon the vacancy of the bishoprick are immediately the
right of the king, as a consequence of his prerogative in church
matters; whereby he is considered as the founder of all
archbishopricks and bishopricks, to whom during the vacancy they
revert. And for the same reason, before the dissolution of abbeys, the
king had the custody of the temporalties of all such abbeys and
priories as were of royal foundation (but not of those founded by
subjects) on the death of the abbot or prior[a]. Another reason may
also be given, why the policy of the law hath vested this custody in
the king; because, as the successor is not known, the lands and
possessions of the see would be liable to spoil and devastation, if no
one had a property therein. Therefore the law has given the king, not
the temporalties themselves, but the _custody_ of the temporalties,
till such time as a successor is appointed; with power of taking to
himself all the intermediate profits, without any account to the
successor; and with the right of presenting (which the crown very
frequently exercises) to such benefices and other preferments as fall
within the time of vacation[b]. This revenue is of so high a nature,
that it could not be granted out to a subject, before, or even after,
it accrued: but now by the statute 14 Edw. III. st. 4. c. 4 & 5. the
king may, after the vacancy, lease the temporalties to the dean and
chapter; saving to himself all advowsons, escheats, and the like. Our
antient kings, and particularly William Rufus, were not only
remarkable for keeping the bishopricks a long time vacant, for the
sake of enjoying the temporalties, but also committed horrible waste
on the woods and other parts of the estate; and, to crown all, would
never, when the see was filled up, restore to the bishop his
temporalties again, unless he purchased them at an exorbitant price.
To remedy which, king Henry the first[c] granted a charter at the
beginning of his reign, promising neither to sell, nor let to farm,
nor take any thing from, the domains of the church, till the successor
was installed. And it was made one of the articles of the great
charter[d], that no waste should be committed in the temporalties of
bishopricks, neither should the custody of them be sold. The same is
ordained by the statute of Westminster the first[e]; and the statute
14 Edw. III. st. 4. c. 4. (which permits, as we have seen, a lease to
the dean and chapter) is still more explicit in prohibiting the other
exactions. It was also a frequent abuse, that the king would for
trifling, or no causes, seise the temporalties of bishops, even during
their lives, into his own hands: but this is guarded against by
statute 1 Edw. III. st. 2. c. 2.

[Footnote a: 2 Inst. 15.]

[Footnote b: Stat. 17 Edw. II. c. 14. F.N.B. 32.]

[Footnote c: Matth. Paris.]

[Footnote d: 9 Hen. III. c. 5.]

[Footnote e: 3 Edw. I. c. 21.]

THIS revenue of the king, which was formerly very considerable, is now
by a customary indulgence almost reduced to nothing: for, at present,
as soon as the new bishop is consecrated and confirmed, he usually
receives the restitution of his temporalties quite entire, and
untouched, from the king; and then, and not sooner, he has a fee
simple in his bishoprick, and may maintain an action for the same[f].

[Footnote f: Co. Litt. 67. 341.]

II. THE king is entitled to a corody, as the law calls it, out of
every bishoprick: that is, to send one of his chaplains to be
maintained by the bishop, or to have a pension allowed him till the
bishop promotes him to a benefice[g]. This is also in the nature of an
acknowlegement to the king, as founder of the see; since he had
formerly the same corody or pension from every abbey or priory of
royal foundation. It is, I apprehend, now fallen into total disuse;
though sir Matthew Hale says[h], that it is due of common right, and
that no prescription will discharge it.

[Footnote g: F.N.B. 230.]

[Footnote h: Notes on F.N.B. above cited.]

III. THE king also (as was formerly observed[i]) is entitled to all
the tithes arising in extraparochial places[k]: though perhaps it may
be doubted how far this article, as well as the last, can be properly
reckoned a part of the king's own royal revenue; since a corody
supports only his chaplains, and these extraparochial tithes are held
under an implied trust, that the king will distribute them for the
good of the clergy in general.

[Footnote i: page 110.]

[Footnote k: 2 Inst. 647.]

IV. THE next branch consists in the first-fruits, and tenths, of all
spiritual preferments in the kingdom; both of which I shall consider
together.

THESE were originally a part of the papal usurpations over the clergy
of this kingdom; first introduced by Pandulph the pope's legate,
during the reigns of king John and Henry the third, in the see of
Norwich; and afterwards attempted to be made universal by the popes
Clement V and John XXII, about the beginning of the fourteenth
century. The first-fruits, _primitiae_, or _annates_, were the first
year's whole profits of the spiritual preferment, according to a rate
or _valor_ made under the direction of pope Innocent IV by Walter
bishop of Norwich in 38 Hen. III, and afterwards advanced in value by
commission from pope Nicholas the third, _A.D._ 1292, 20 Edw. I[l];
which valuation of pope Nicholas is still preserved in the
exchequer[m]. The tenths, or _decimae_, were the tenth part of the
annual profit of each living by the same valuation; which was also
claimed by the holy see, under no better pretence than a strange
misapplication of that precept of the Levitical law, which directs[n],
"that the Levites should offer the tenth part of their tithe as a
heave-offering to the Lord, and give it to Aaron the _high_ priest."
But this claim of the pope met with vigorous resistance from the
English parliament; and a variety of acts were passed to prevent and
restrain it, particularly the statute 6 Hen. IV. c. 1. which calls it
a horrible mischief and damnable custom. But the popish clergy,
blindly devoted to the will of a foreign master, still kept it on
foot; sometimes more secretly, sometimes more openly and avowedly: so
that, in the reign of Henry VIII, it was computed, that in the compass
of fifty years 800000 ducats had been sent to Rome for first-fruits
only. And, as the clergy expressed this willingness to contribute so
much of their income to the head of the church, it was thought proper
(when in the same reign the papal power was abolished, and the king
was declared the head of the church of England) to annex this revenue
to the crown; which was done by statute 26 Hen. VIII. c. 3. (confirmed
by statute 1 Eliz. c. 4.) and a new _valor beneficiorum_ was then
made, by which the clergy are at present rated.

[Footnote l: F.N.B. 176.]

[Footnote m: 3 Inst. 154.]

[Footnote n: Numb. 18. 26.]

BY these lastmentioned statutes all vicarages under ten pounds a year,
and all rectories under ten marks, are discharged from the payment of
first-fruits: and if, in such livings as continue chargeable with this
payment, the incumbent lives but half a year, he shall pay only one
quarter of his first-fruits; if but one whole year, then half of them;
if a year and half, three quarters; and if two years, then the whole;
and not otherwise. Likewise by the statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 8. no
tenths are to be paid for the first year, for then the first-fruits
are due: and by other statutes of queen Anne, in the fifth and sixth
years of her reign, if a benefice be under fifty pounds _per annum_
clear yearly value, it shall be discharged of the payment of
first-fruits and tenths.

THUS the richer clergy, being, by the criminal bigotry of their popish
predecessors, subjected at first to a foreign exaction, were
afterwards, when that yoke was shaken off, liable to a like
misapplication of their revenues, through the rapacious disposition of
the then reigning monarch: till at length the piety of queen Anne
restored to the church what had been thus indirectly taken from it.
This she did, not by remitting the tenths and first-fruits entirely;
but, in a spirit of the truest equity, by applying these superfluities
of the larger benefices to make up the deficiences of the smaller. And
to this end she granted her royal charter, which was confirmed by the
statute 2 Ann. c. 11. whereby all the revenue of first-fruits and
tenths is vested in trustees for ever, to form a perpetual fund for
the augmentation of poor livings. This is usually called queen Anne's
bounty; which has been still farther regulated by subsequent statutes,
too numerous here to recite.

V. THE next branch of the king's ordinary revenue (which, as well as
the subsequent branches, is of a lay or temporal nature) consists in
the rents and profits of the demesne lands of the crown. These demesne
lands, _terrae dominicales regis_, being either the share reserved to
the crown at the original distribution of landed property, or such as
came to it afterwards by forfeitures or other means, were antiently
very large and extensive; comprizing divers manors, honors, and
lordships; the tenants of which had very peculiar privileges, as will
be shewn in the second book of these commentaries, when we speak of
the tenure in antient demesne. At present they are contracted within a
very narrow compass, having been almost entirely granted away to
private subjects. This has occasioned the parliament frequently to
interpose; and, particularly, after king William III had greatly
impoverished the crown, an act passed[o], whereby all future grants or
leases from the crown for any longer term than thirty one years or
three lives are declared to be void; except with regard to houses,
which may be granted for fifty years. And no reversionary lease can be
made, so as to exceed, together with the estate in being, the same
term of three lives or thirty one years: that is, where there is a
subsisting lease, of which there are twenty years still to come, the
king cannot grant a future interest, to commence after the expiration
of the former, for any longer term than eleven years. The tenant must
also be made liable to be punished for committing waste; and the
usual rent must be reserved, or, where there has usually been no rent,
one third of the clear yearly value[p]. The misfortune is, that this
act was made too late, after almost every valuable possession of the
crown had been granted away for ever, or else upon very long leases;
but may be of benefit to posterity, when those leases come to expire.

[Footnote o: 1 Ann. st. 1. c. 7.]

[Footnote p: In like manner, by the civil law, the inheritances or
_fundi patrimoniales_ of the imperial crown could not be alienated,
but only let to farm. _Cod._ _l._ 11. _t._ 61.]

VI. HITHER might have been referred the advantages which were used to
arise to the king from the profits of his military tenures, to which
most lands in the kingdom were subject, till the statute 12 Car. II.
c. 24. which in great measure abolished them all: the explication of
the nature of which tenures, must be referred to the second book of
these commentaries. Hither also might have been referred the
profitable prerogative of purveyance and pre-emption: which was a
right enjoyed by the crown of buying up provisions and other
necessaries, by the intervention of the king's purveyors, for the use
of his royal houshold, at an appraised valuation, in preference to all
others, and even without consent of the owner; and also of forcibly
impressing the carriages and horses of the subject, to do the king's
business on the publick roads, in the conveyance of timber, baggage,
and the like, however inconvenient to the proprietor, upon paying him
a settled price. A prerogative, which prevailed pretty generally
throughout Europe, during the scarcity of gold and silver, and the
high valuation of money consequential thereupon. In those early times
the king's houshold (as well as those of inferior lords) were
supported by specific renders of corn, and other victuals, from the
tenants of the respective demesnes; and there was also a continual
market kept at the palace gate to furnish viands for the royal use[q].
And this answered all purposes, in those ages of simplicity, so long
as the king's court continued in any certain place. But when it
removed from one part of the kingdom to another (as was formerly very
frequently done) it was found necessary to send purveyors beforehand,
to get together a sufficient quantity of provisions and other
necessaries for the houshold: and, lest the unusual demand should
raise them to an exorbitant price, the powers beforementioned were
vested in these purveyors; who in process of time very greatly abused
their authority, and became a great oppression to the subject though
of little advantage to the crown; ready money in open market (when the
royal residence was more permanent, and specie began to be plenty)
being found upon experience to be the best proveditor of any.
Wherefore by degrees the powers of purveyance have declined, in
foreign countries as well as our own; and particularly were abolished
in Sweden by Gustavus Adolphus, toward the beginning of the last
century[r]. And, with us in England, having fallen into disuse during
the suspension of monarchy, king Charles at his restoration consented,
by the same statute, to resign intirely these branches of his revenue
and power, for the ease and convenience of his subjects: and the
parliament, in part of recompense, settled on him, his heirs, and
successors, for ever, the hereditary excise of fifteen pence _per_
barrel on all beer and ale sold in the kingdom, and a proportionable
sum for certain other liquors. So that this hereditary excise, the
nature of which shall be farther explained in the subsequent part of
this chapter, now forms the sixth branch of his majesty's ordinary
revenue.

[Footnote q: 4 Inst. 273.]

[Footnote r: Mod. Un. Hist. xxxiii. 220.]

VII. A SEVENTH branch might also be computed to have arisen from wine
licences; or the rents payable to the crown by such persons as are
licensed to sell wine by retale throughout England, except in a few
privileged places. These were first settled on the crown by the
statute 12 Car. II. c. 25. and, together with the hereditary excise,
made up the equivalent in value for the loss sustained by the
prerogative in the abolition of the military tenures, and the right of
pre-emption and purveyance: but this revenue was abolished by the
statute 30 Geo. II. c. 19. and an annual sum of upwards of £7000 _per
annum_, issuing out of the new stamp duties imposed on wine licences,
was settled on the crown in it's stead.

VIII. AN eighth branch of the king's ordinary revenue is usually
reckoned to consist in the profits arising from his forests. Forests
are waste grounds belonging to the king, replenished with all manner
of beasts of chase or venary; which are under the king's protection,
for the sake of his royal recreation and delight: and, to that end,
and for preservation of the king's game, there are particular laws,
privileges, courts and officers belonging to the king's forests; all
which will be, in their turns, explained in the subsequent books of
these commentaries. What we are now to consider are only the profits
arising to the king from hence; which consist principally in
amercements or fines levied for offences against the forest-laws. But
as few, if any courts of this kind for levying amercements have been
held since 1632, 8 Car. I. and as, from the accounts given of the
proceedings in that court by our histories and law books[s], nobody
would now wish to see them again revived, it is needless (at least in
this place) to pursue this enquiry any farther.

[Footnote s: 1 Jones. 267-298.]

IX. THE profits arising from the king's ordinary courts of justice
make a ninth branch of his revenue. And these consist not only in
fines imposed upon offenders, forfeitures of recognizances, and
amercements levied upon defaulters; but also in certain fees due to
the crown in a variety of legal matters, as, for setting the great
seal to charters, original writs, and other legal proceedings, and for
permitting fines to be levied of lands in order to bar entails, or
otherwise to insure their title. As none of these can be done without
the immediate intervention of the king, by himself or his officers,
the law allows him certain perquisites and profits, as a recompense
for the trouble he undertakes for the public. These, in process of
time, have been almost all granted out to private persons, or else
appropriated to certain particular uses: so that, though our
law-proceedings are still loaded with their payment, very little of
them is now returned into the king's exchequer; for a part of whose
royal maintenance they were originally intended. All future grants of
them however, by the statute 1 Ann. st. 2. c. 7. are to endure for no
longer time than the prince's life who grants them.

X. A TENTH branch of the king's ordinary revenue, said to be grounded
on the consideration of his guarding and protecting the seas from
pirates and robbers, is the right to _royal fish_, which are whale and
sturgeon: and these, when either thrown ashore, or caught near the
coasts, are the property of the king, on account[t] of their superior
excellence. Indeed our ancestors seem to have entertained a very high
notion of the importance of this right; it being the prerogative of
the kings of Denmark and the dukes of Normandy[u]; and from one of
these it was probably derived to our princes. It is expressly claimed
and allowed in the statute _de praerogativa regis_[w]: and the most
antient treatises of law now extant make mention of it[x]; though they
seem to have made a distinction between whale and sturgeon, as was
incidentally observed in a former chapter[y].

[Footnote t: Plowd. 315.]

[Footnote u: Stiernh. _de jure Sueonum._ _l._ 2. _c._ 8. _Gr.
Coustum._ _cap._ 17.]

[Footnote w: 17 Edw. II. c. 11.]

[Footnote x: Bracton. _l._ 3. _c._ 3. Britton. _c._ 17. Fleta. _l._ 1.
_c._ 45 & 46.]

[Footnote y: ch. 4. pag. 216.]

XI. ANOTHER maritime revenue, and founded partly upon the same reason,
is that of shipwrecks; which are also declared to be the king's
property by the same prerogative statute 17 Edw. II. c. 11. and were
so, long before, at the common law. It is worthy observation, how
greatly the law of wrecks has been altered, and the rigour of it
gradually softened, in favour of the distressed proprietors. Wreck, by
the antient common law, was where any ship was lost at sea, and the
goods or cargo were thrown upon the land; in which case these goods,
so wrecked, were adjudged to belong to the king: for it was held,
that, by the loss of the ship, all property was gone out of the
original owner[z]. But this was undoubtedly adding sorrow to sorrow,
and was consonant neither to reason nor humanity. Wherefore it was
first ordained by king Henry I, that if any person escaped alive out
of the ship it should be no wreck[a]; and afterwards king Henry II, by
his charter[b], declared, that if on the coasts of either England,
Poictou, Oleron, or Gascony, any ship should be distressed, and either
man or beast should escape or be found therein alive, the goods should
remain to the owners, if they claimed them within three months; but
otherwise should be esteemed a wreck, and should belong to the king,
or other lord of the franchise. This was again confirmed with
improvements by king Richard the first, who, in the second year of his
reign[c], not only established these concessions, by ordaining that
the owner, if he was shipwrecked and escaped, "_omnes res suas liberas
et quietas haberet_," but also, that, if he perished, his children, or
in default of them his brethren and sisters, should retain the
property; and, in default of brother or sister, then the goods should
remain to the king[d]. And the law, so long after as the reign of
Henry III, seems still to have been guided by the same equitable
provisions. For then if a dog (for instance) escaped, by which the
owner might be discovered, or if any certain mark were set on the
goods, by which they might be known again, it was held to be no
wreck[e]. And this is certainly most agreeable to reason; the rational
claim of the king being only founded upon this, that the true owner
cannot be ascertained. But afterwards, in the statute of Westminster
the first[f], the law is laid down more agreeable to the charter of
king Henry the second: and upon that statute hath stood the legal
doctrine of wrecks to the present time. It enacts, that if any live
thing escape (a man, a cat, or a dog; which, as in Bracton, are only
put for examples[g],) in this case, and, as it seems, in this case
only, it is clearly not a legal wreck: but the sheriff of the county
is bound to keep the goods a year and a day (as in France for one
year, agreeably to the maritime laws of Oleron[h], and in Holland for
a year and an half) that if any man can prove a property in them,
either in his own right or by right of representation[i], they shall
be restored to him without delay; but, if no such property be proved
within that time, they then shall be the king's. If the goods are of a
perishable nature, the sheriff may sell them, and the money shall be
liable in their stead[k]. This revenue of wrecks is frequently granted
out to lords of manors, as a royal franchise; and if any one be thus
entitled to wrecks in his own land, and the king's goods are wrecked
thereon, the king may claim them at any time, even after the year and
day[l].

[Footnote z: Dr & St. d. 2. c. 51.]

[Footnote a: Spelm. _Cod. apud_ Wilkins. 305.]

[Footnote b: 26 May, _A.D._ 1174. 1 Rym. _Foed._ 36.]

[Footnote c: Rog. Hoved. _in Ric. I_.]

[Footnote d: In like manner Constantine the great, finding that by the
imperial law the revenue of wrecks was given to the prince's treasury
or _fiscus_, restrained it by an edict (_Cod._ 11. 5. 1.) and ordered
them to remain to the owners; adding this humane expostulation, "_Quod
enim jus habet fiscus in aliena calamitate, ut de re tam luctuosa
compendium sectetur?_"]

[Footnote e: Bract. _l._ 3. _c._ 3.]

[Footnote f: 3 Edw. I. c. 4.]

[Footnote g: Flet. 1. _c._ 44. 2 Inst. 167.]

[Footnote h: §. 28.]

[Footnote i: 2 Inst. 168.]

[Footnote k: Plowd. 166.]

[Footnote l: 2 Inst. 168. Bro. Abr. _tit. Wreck_.]

IT is to be observed, that in order to constitute a legal _wreck_, the
goods must come to land. If they continue at sea, the law
distinguishes them by the barbarous and uncouth appellations of
_jetsam_, _flotsam_, and _ligan_. Jetsam is where goods are cast into
the sea, and there sink and remain under water: flotsam is where they
continue swimming on the surface of the waves: ligan is where they are
sunk in the sea, but tied to a cork or buoy, in order to be found
again[m]. These are also the king's, if no owner appears to claim
them; but, if any owner appears, he is entitled to recover the
possession. For even if they be cast overboard, without any mark or
buoy, in order to lighten the ship, the owner is not by this act of
necessity construed to have renounced his property[n]: much less can
things ligan be supposed to be abandoned, since the owner has done all
in his power, to assert and retain his property. These three are
therefore accounted so far a distinct thing from the former, that by
the king's grant to a man of wrecks, things jetsam, flotsam, and ligan
will not pass[o].

[Footnote m: 5 Rep. 106.]

[Footnote n: _Quae enim res in tempestate, levandae navis causa,
ejiciuntur, hac dominorum permanent. Quia palam est, eas non eo animo
ejici, quod quis habere nolit._ _Inst._ 2. 1. §. 48.]

[Footnote o: 5 Rep. 108.]

WRECKS, in their legal acceptation, are at present not very frequent:
it rarely happening that every living creature on board perishes; and
if any should survive, it is a very great chance, since the
improvement of commerce, navigation, and correspondence, but the owner
will be able to assert his property within the year and day limited by
law. And in order to preserve this property entire for him, and if
possible to prevent wrecks at all, our laws have made many very humane
regulations; in a spirit quite opposite to those savage laws, which
formerly prevailed in all the northern regions of Europe, and a few
years ago were still laid to subsist on the coasts of the Baltic sea,
permitting the inhabitants to seize on whatever they could get as
lawful prize; or, as an author of their own expresses it, "_in
naufragorum miseria et calamitate tanquam vultures ad praedam
currere_[p]." For by the statute 2 Edw. III. c. 13. if any ship be
lost on the shore, and the goods come to land (so as it be not legal
wreck) they shall be presently delivered to the merchants, they paying
only a reasonable reward to those that saved and preserved them, which
is intitled _salvage_. Also by the common law, if any persons (other
than the sheriff) take any goods so cast on shore, which are not legal
wreck, the owners might have a commission to enquire and find them
out, and compel them to make restitution[q]. And by statute 12 Ann.
st. 2. c. 18. confirmed by 4 Geo. I. c. 12. in order to assist the
distressed, and prevent the scandalous illegal practices on some of
our sea coasts, (too similar to those on the Baltic) it is enacted,
that all head-officers and others of towns near the sea shall, upon
application made to them, summon as many hands as are necessary, and
send them to the relief of any ship in distress, on forfeiture of
100_l._ and, in case of assistance given, salvage shall be paid by the
owners, to be assessed by three neighbouring justices. All persons
that secrete any goods shall forfeit their treble value: and if they
wilfully do any act whereby the ship is lost or destroyed, by making
holes in her, stealing her pumps, or otherwise, they are guilty of
felony, without benefit of clergy. Lastly, by the statute 26 Geo. II.
c. 19. plundering any vessel either in distress, or wrecked, and
whether any living creature be on board or not, (for, whether wreck or
otherwise, it is clearly not the property of the populace) such
plundering, I say, or preventing the escape of any person that
endeavors to save his life, or wounding him with intent to destroy
him, or putting out false lights in order to bring any vessel into
danger, are all declared to be capital felonies; in like manner as the
destroying trees, steeples, or other stated seamarks, is punished by
the statute 8 Eliz. c. 13. with a forfeiture of 200_l._ Moreover, by
the statute of George II, pilfering any goods cast ashore is declared
to be petty larceny; and many other salutary regulations are made, for
the more effectually preserving ships of any nation in distress[r].

[Footnote p: Stiernh. _de jure Sueon._ _l._ 3. _c._ 5.]

[Footnote q: F.N.B. 112.]

[Footnote r: By the civil law, to destroy persons shipwrecked, or
prevent their saving the ship, is capital. And to steal even a plank
from a vessel in distress, or wrecked, makes the party liable to
answer for the whole ship and cargo. (_Ff._ 47. 9. 3.) The laws also
of the Wisigoths, and the most early Neapolitan constitutions,
punished with the utmost severity all those who neglected to assist
any ship in distress, or plundered any goods cast on shore.
(Lindenbrog. _Cod. LL. antiq._ 146. 715.)]

XII. A TWELFTH branch of the royal revenue, the right to mines, has
it's original from the king's prerogative of coinage, in order to
supply him with materials: and therefore those mines, which are
properly royal, and to which the king is entitled when found, are only
those of silver and gold[s]. By the old common law, if gold or silver
be found in mines of base metal, according to the opinion of some the
whole was a royal mine, and belonged to the king; though others held
that it only did so, if the quantity of gold or silver was of greater
value than the quantity of base metal[t]. But now by the statutes 1 W.
& M. st. 1. c. 30. and 5 W. & M. c. 6. this difference is made
immaterial; it being enacted, that no mines of copper, tin, iron, or
lead, shall be looked upon as royal mines, notwithstanding gold or
silver may be extracted from them in any quantities: but that the
king, or persons claiming royal mines under his authority, may have
the ore, (other than tin-ore in the counties of Devon and Cornwall)
paying for the same a price stated in the act. This was an extremely
reasonable law: for now private owners are not discouraged from
working mines, through a fear that they may be claimed as royal ones;
neither does the king depart from the just rights of his revenue,
since he may have all the precious metal contained in the ore, paying
no more for it than the value of the base metal which it is supposed
to be; to which base metal the land-owner is by reason and law
entitled.

[Footnote s: 2 Inst. 577.]

[Footnote t: Plowd. 566.]

XIII. TO the same original may in part be referred the revenue of
treasure-trove (derived from the French word, _trover_, to find)
called in Latin _thesaurus inventus_, which is where any money or
coin, gold, silver, plate, or bullion, is found hidden _in_ the earth,
or other private place, the owner thereof being unknown; in which case
the treasure belongs to the king: but if he that hid it be known, or
afterwards found out, the owner and not the king is entitled to it[u].
Also if it be found in the sea, or _upon_ the earth, it doth not
belong to the king, but the finder, if no owner appears[w]. So that it
seems it is the _hiding_, not the _abandoning_ of it, that gives the
king a property: Bracton[x] defining it, in the words of the
civilians, to be "_vetus depositio pecuniae_." This difference clearly
arises from the different intentions, which the law implies in the
owner. A man, that hides his treasure in a secret place, evidently
does not mean to relinquish his property; but reserves a right of
claiming it again, when he sees occasion; and, if he dies and the
secret also dies with him, the law gives it the king, in part of his
royal revenue. But a man that scatters his treasure into the sea, or
upon the public surface of the earth, is construed to have absolutely
abandoned his property, and returned it into the common stock, without
any intention of reclaiming it; and therefore it belongs, as in a
state of nature, to the first occupant, or finder; unless the owner
appear and assert his right, which then proves that the loss was by
accident, and not with an intent to renounce his property.

[Footnote u: 3 Inst. 132. Dalt. Sheriffs. c. 16.]

[Footnote w: Britt. c. 17. Finch. L. 177.]

[Footnote x: _l._ 3. _c._ 3. §. 4.]

FORMERLY all treasure-trove belonged to the finder[y]; as was also the
rule of the civil law[z]. Afterwards it was judged expedient for the
purposes of the state, and particularly for the coinage, to allow part
of what was so found to the king; which part was assigned to be all
_hidden_ treasure; such as is _casually lost_ and unclaimed, and also
such as is _designedly abandoned_, still remaining the right of the
fortunate finder. And that the prince shall be entitled to this hidden
treasure is now grown to be, according to Grotius[a], "_jus commune,
et quasi gentium_:" for it is not only observed, he adds, in England,
but in Germany, France, Spain, and Denmark. The finding of deposited
treasure was much more frequent, and the treasures themselves more
considerable, in the infancy of our constitution than at present. When
the Romans, and other inhabitants of the respective countries which
composed their empire, were driven out by the northern nations, they
concealed their money under-ground; with a view of resorting to it
again when the heat of the irruption should be over, and the invaders
driven back to their desarts. But as this never happened, the
treasures were never claimed; and on the death of the owners the
secret also died along with them. The conquering generals, being aware
of the value of these hidden mines, made it highly penal to secrete
them from the public service. In England therefore, as among the
feudists[b], the punishment of such as concealed from the king the
finding of hidden treasure was formerly no less than death; but now it
is only fine and imprisonment[c].

[Footnote y: Bracton. _l._ 3. _c._ 3. 3 Inst. 133.]

[Footnote z: _Ff._ 41. 1. 31.]

[Footnote a: _de jur. b. & p._ _l._ 2. _c._ 8. §. 7.]

[Footnote b: Glanv. _l._ 1. _c._ 2. Crag. 1. 16. 40.]

[Footnote c: 3 Inst. 133.]

XIV. WAIFS, _bona waviata_, are goods stolen, and waived or thrown
away by the thief in his flight, for fear of being apprehended. These
are given to the king by the law, as a punishment upon the owner, for
not himself pursuing the felon, and taking away his goods from him[d].
And therefore if the party robbed do his diligence immediately to
follow and apprehend the thief (which is called making fresh _suit_)
or do convict him afterwards, or procure evidence to convict him, he
shall have his goods again[e]. Waived goods do also not belong to the
king, till seised by somebody for his use; for if the party robbed can
seise them first, though at the distance of twenty years, the king
shall never have them[f]. If the goods are hid by the thief, or left
any where by him, so that he had them not about him when he fled, and
therefore did not throw them away in his flight; these also are not
_bona waviata_, but the owner may have them again when he pleases[g].
The goods of a foreign merchant, though stolen and thrown away in
flight, shall never be waifs[h]: the reason whereof may be, not only
for the encouragement of trade, but also because there is no wilful
default in the foreign merchant's not pursuing the thief, he being
generally a stranger to our laws, our usages, and our language.

[Footnote d: Cro. Eliz. 694.]

[Footnote e: Finch. L. 212.]

[Footnote f: _Ibid._]

[Footnote g: 5 Rep. 109.]

[Footnote h: Fitzh. _Abr. tit. Estray._ 1. 3 Bulstr. 19.]

XV. ESTRAYS are such valuable animals as are found wandering in any
manor or lordship, and no man knoweth the owner of them; in which case
the law gives them to the king as the general owner and lord paramount
of the soil, in recompence for the damage which they may have done
therein; and they now most commonly belong to the lord of the manor,
by special grant from the crown. But in order to vest an absolute
property in the king or his grantees, they must be proclaimed in the
church and two market towns next adjoining to the place where they are
found; and then, if no man claims them, after proclamation and a year
and a day passed, they belong to the king or his substitute without
redemption[i]; even though the owner were a minor, or under any other
legal incapacity[k]. A provision similar to which obtained in the old
Gothic constitution, with regard to all things that were found, which
were to be thrice proclaimed, _primum coram comitibus et viatoribus
obviis, deinde in proxima villa vel pago, postremo coram ecclesia vel
judicio_: and the space of a year was allowed for the owner to reclaim
his property[l]. If the owner claims them within the year and day, he
must pay the charges of finding, keeping, and proclaiming them[m]. The
king or lord has no property till the year and day passed: for if a
lord keepeth an estray three quarters of a year, and within the year
it strayeth again, and another lord getteth it, the first lord cannot
take it again[n]. Any beast may be an estray, that is by nature tame
or reclaimable, and in which there is a valuable property, as sheep,
oxen, swine, and horses, which we in general call cattle; and so
Fleta[o] defines it, _pecus vagans, quod nullus petit, sequitur, vel
advocat_. For animals upon which the law sets no value, as a dog or
cat, and animals _ferae naturae_, as a bear or wolf, cannot be
considered as estrays. So swans may be estrays, but not any other
fowl[p]; whence they are said to be royal fowl. The reason of which
distinction seems to be, that, cattle and swans being of a reclaimed
nature, the owner's property in them is not lost merely by their
temporary escape; and they also, from their intrinsic value, are a
sufficient pledge for the expense of the lord of the franchise in
keeping them the year and day. For he that takes an estray is bound,
so long as he keeps it, to find it in provisions and keep it from
damage[q]; and may not use it by way of labour, but is liable to an
action for so doing[r]. Yet he may milk a cow, or the like, for that
tends to the preservation, and is for the benefit, of the animal[s].

[Footnote i: Mirr. c. 3. §. 19.]

[Footnote k: 5 Rep. 108. Bro. _Abr. tit. Estray._ Cro. Eliz. 716.]

[Footnote l: Stiernh. _de jur. Gothor._ _l._ 3. _c._ 5.]

[Footnote m: Dalt. Sh. 79.]

[Footnote n: Finch. L. 177.]

[Footnote o: _l._ 1. _c._ 43.]

[Footnote p: 7 Rep. 17.]

[Footnote q: 1 Roll. Abr. 889.]

[Footnote r: Cro. Jac. 147.]

[Footnote s: Cro. Jac. 148. Noy. 119.]

BESIDES the particular reasons before given why the king should have
the several revenues of royal fish, shipwrecks, treasure-trove, waifs,
and estrays, there is also one general reason which holds for them
all; and that is, because they are _bona vacantia_, or goods in which
no one else can claim a property. And therefore by the law of nature
they belonged to the first occupant or finder; and so continued under
the imperial law. But, in settling the modern constitutions of most of
the governments in Europe, it was thought proper (to prevent that
strife and contention, which the mere title of occupancy is apt to
create and continue, and to provide for the support of public
authority in a manner the least burthensome to individuals) that these
rights should be annexed to the supreme power by the positive laws of
the state. And so it came to pass that, as Bracton expresses it[t],
_haec, quae nullius in bonis sunt, et olim fuerunt inventoris de jure
naturali, jam efficiuntur principis de jure gentium_.

[Footnote t: _l._ 1. _c._ 12.]

XVI. THE next branch of the king's ordinary revenue consists in
forfeitures of lands and goods for offences; _bona confiscata_, as
they are called by the civilians, because they belonged to the
_fiscus_ or imperial treasury; or, as our lawyers term them,
_forisfacta_, that is, such whereof the property is gone away or
departed from the owner. The true reason and only substantial ground
of any forfeiture for crimes consist in this; that all property is
derived from society, being one of those civil rights which are
conferred upon individuals, in exchange for that degree of natural
freedom, which every man must sacrifice when he enters into social
communities. If therefore a member of any national community violates
the fundamental contract of his association, by transgressing the
municipal law, he forfeits his right to such privileges as he claims
by that contract; and the state may very justly resume that portion of
property, or any part of it, which the laws have before assigned him.
Hence, in every offence of an atrocious kind, the laws of England have
exacted a total confiscation of the moveables or personal estate; and
in many cases a perpetual, in others only a temporary, loss of the
offender's immoveables or landed property; and have vested them both
in the king, who is the person supposed to be offended, being the one
visible magistrate in whom the majesty of the public resides. The
particulars of these forfeitures will be more properly recited when we
treat of crimes and misdemesnors. I therefore only mention them here,
for the sake of regularity, as a part of the _census regalis_; and
shall postpone for the present the farther consideration of all
forfeitures, excepting one species only, which arises from the
misfortune rather than the crime of the owner, and is called a
_deodand_.

BY this is meant whatever personal chattel is the immediate occasion
of the death of any reasonable creature; which is forfeited to the
king, to be applied to pious uses, and distributed in alms by his high
almoner[u]; though formerly destined to a more superstitious purpose.
It seems to have been originally designed, in the blind days of
popery, as an expiation for the souls of such as were snatched away by
sudden death; and for that purpose ought properly to have been given
to holy church[w]; in the same manner, as the apparel of a stranger
who was found dead was applied to purchase masses for the good of his
soul. And this may account for that rule of law, that no deodand is
due where an infant under the years of discretion is killed by a fall
_from_ a cart, or horse, or the like, not being in motion[x]; whereas,
if an adult person falls from thence and is killed, the thing is
certainly forfeited. For the reason given by sir Matthew Hale seems to
be very inadequate, _viz._ because an infant is not able to take care
of himself: for why should the owner save his forfeiture, on account
of the imbecillity of the child, which ought rather to have made him
more cautious to prevent any accident of mischief? The true ground of
this rule seems rather to be, that the child, by reason of it's want
of discretion, is presumed incapable of actual sin, and therefore
needed no deodand to purchase propitiatory masses: but every adult,
who dies in actual sin, stood in need of such atonement, according to
the humane superstition of the founders of the English law.

[Footnote u: 1 Hal. P.C. 419. Fleta. _l._ 1. _c._ 25.]

[Footnote w: Fitzh. _Abr. tit. Enditement._ _pl._ 27. Staunf. P.C. 20,
21.]

[Footnote x: 3 Inst. 57. 1 Hal. P.C. 422.]

THUS stands the law, if a person be killed by a fall from a thing
standing still. But if a horse, or ox, or other animal, of his own
motion, kill as well an infant as an adult, or if a cart run over him,
they shall in either case be forfeited as deodands[y]; which is
grounded upon this additional reason, that such misfortunes are in
part owing to the negligence of the owner, and therefore he is
properly punished by such forfeiture. A like punishment is in like
cases inflicted by the mosaical law[z]: "if an ox gore a man that he
die, the ox shall be stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten." And
among the Athenians[a], whatever was the cause of a man's death, by
falling upon him, was exterminated or cast out of the dominions of the
republic. Where a thing, not in motion, is the occasion of a man's
death, that part only which is the immediate cause is forfeited; as if
a man be climbing up a wheel, and is killed by falling from it, the
wheel alone is a deodand[b]: but, wherever the thing is in motion, not
only that part which immediately gives the wound, (as the wheel, which
runs over his body) but all things which move with it and help to make
the wound more dangerous (as the cart and loading, which increase the
pressure of the wheel) are forfeited[c]. It matters not whether the
owner were concerned in the killing or not; for if a man kills another
with my sword, the sword is forfeited[d] as an accursed thing[e]. And
therefore, in all indictments for homicide, the instrument of death
and the value are presented and found by the grand jury (as, that the
stroke was given with a certain penknife, value sixpence) that the
king or his grantee may claim the deodand: for it is no deodand,
unless it be presented as such by a jury of twelve men[f]. No deodands
are due for accidents happening upon the high sea, that being out of
the jurisdiction of the common law: but if a man falls from a boat or
ship in fresh water, and is drowned, the vessel and cargo are in
strictness a deodand[g].

[Footnote y: _Omnia, quae movent ad mortem, sunt Deo danda._ Bracton.
_l._ 3. _c._ 5.]

[Footnote z: Exod. 21. 28.]

[Footnote a: Aeschin. _contr. Ctesiph._]

[Footnote b: 1 Hal. P.C. 422.]

[Footnote c: 1 Hawk. P.C. c. 26.]

[Footnote d: A similar rule obtained among the antient Goths. _Si
quis, me nesciente, quocunque meo telo vel instrumento in perniciem
suam abutatur; vel ex aedibus meis cadat, vel incidat in puteum meum,
quantumvis tectum et munitum, vel in cataractam, et sub molendino meo
confringatur, ipse aliqua mulcta plectar; ut in parte infelicitatis
meae numeretur, habuisse vel aedificasse aliquod quo homo periret._
Stiernhook _de jure Goth._ _l._ 3. _c._ 4.]

[Footnote e: Dr & St. d. 2. c. 51.]

[Footnote f: 3 Inst. 57.]

[Footnote g: 3 Inst. 58. 1 Hal. P.C. 423. Molloy _de jur. maritim._ 2.
225.]

DEODANDS, and forfeitures in general, as well as wrecks, treasure
trove, royal fish, mines, waifs, and estrays, may be granted by the
king to particular subjects, as a royal franchise: and indeed they are
for the most part granted out to the lords of manors, or other
liberties; to the perversion of their original design.

XVII. ANOTHER branch of the king's ordinary revenue arises from
escheats of lands, which happen upon the defect of heirs to succeed to
the inheritance; whereupon they in general revert to and vest in the
king, who is esteemed, in the eye of the law, the original proprietor
of all the lands in the kingdom. But the discussion of this topic more
properly belongs to the second book of these commentaries, wherein we
shall particularly consider the manner in which lands may be acquired
or lost by escheat.

XVIII. I PROCEED therefore to the eighteenth and last branch of the
king's ordinary revenue; which consists in the custody of idiots, from
whence we shall be naturally led to consider also the custody of
lunatics.

AN idiot, or natural fool, is one that hath had no understanding from
his nativity; and therefore is by law presumed never likely to attain
any. For which reason the custody of him and of his lands was formerly
vested in the lord of the fee[h]; (and therefore still, by special
custom, in some manors the lord shall have the ordering of idiot and
lunatic copyholders[i]) but, by reason of the manifold abuses of this
power by subjects, it was at last provided by common consent, that it
should be given to the king, as the general conservator of his people,
in order to prevent the idiot from wasting his estate, and reducing
himself and his heirs to poverty and distress[k]: This fiscal
prerogative of the king is declared in parliament by statute 17 Edw.
II. c. 9. which directs (in affirmance of the common law[l],) that the
king shall have ward of the lands of natural fools, taking the profits
without waste or destruction, and shall find them necessaries; and
after the death of such idiots he shall render the estate to the
heirs; in order to prevent such idiots from aliening their lands, and
their heirs from being disherited.

[Footnote h: Flet. _l._ 1. _c._ 11. §. 10.]

[Footnote i: Dyer. 302. Hutt. 17. Noy 27.]

[Footnote k: F.N.B. 232.]

[Footnote l: 4 Rep. 126.]

BY the old common law there is a writ _de idiota inquirendo_, to
enquire whether a man be an idiot or not[m]: which must be tried by a
jury of twelve men; and if they find him _purus idiota_, the profits
of his lands, and the custody of his person may be granted by the king
to some subject, who has interest enough to obtain them[n]. This
branch of the revenue hath been long considered as a hardship upon
private families; and so long ago as in the 8 Jac. I. it was under the
consideration of parliament, to vest this custody in the relations of
the party, and to settle an equivalent on the crown in lieu of it; it
being then proposed to share the same fate with the slavery of the
feodal tenures, which has been since abolished[o]. Yet few instances
can be given of the oppressive exertion of it, since it seldom happens
that a jury finds a man an idiot _a nativitate_, but only _non compos
mentis_ from some particular time; which has an operation very
different in point of law.

[Footnote m: F.N.B. 232.]

[Footnote n: This power, though of late very rarely exerted, is still
alluded to in common speech, by that usual expression of _begging_ a
man for a fool.]

[Footnote o: 4. Inst. 203. Com. Journ. 1610.]

A MAN is not an idiot[p], if he hath any glimmering of reason, so that
he can tell his parents, his age, or the like common matters. But a
man who is born deaf, dumb, and blind, is looked upon by the law as in
the same state with an idiot[q]; he being supposed incapable of
understanding, as wanting those senses which furnish the human mind
with ideas.

[Footnote p: F.N.B. 233.]

[Footnote q: Co. Litt. 42. Fleta. _l._ 6. _c._ 40.]

A LUNATIC, or _non compos mentis_, is one who hath had understanding,
but by disease, grief, or other accident hath lost the use of his
reason. A lunatic is indeed properly one that hath lucid intervals;
sometimes enjoying his senses, and sometimes not, and that frequently
depending upon the change of the moon. But under the general name of
_non compos mentis_ (which sir Edward Coke says is the most legal
name[r]) are comprized not only lunatics, but persons under frenzies;
or who lose their intellects by disease; those that _grow_ deaf, dumb,
and blind, not being _born_ so; or such, in short, as are by any means
rendered incapable of conducting their own affairs. To these also, as
well as idiots, the king is guardian, but to a very different purpose.
For the law always imagines, that these accidental misfortunes may be
removed; and therefore only constitutes the crown a trustee for the
unfortunate persons, to protect their property, and to account to them
for all profits received, if they recover, or after their decease to
their representatives. And therefore it is declared by the statute 17
Edw. II. c. 10. that the king shall provide for the custody and
sustentation of lunatics, and preserve their lands and the profits of
them, for their use, when they come to their right mind: and the king
shall take nothing to his own use; and if the parties die in such
estate, the residue shall be distributed for their souls by the advice
of the ordinary, and of course (by the subsequent amendments of the
law of administrations) shall now go to their executors or
administrators.

[Footnote r: 1 Inst. 246.]

THE method of proving a person _non compos_ is very similar to that of
proving him an idiot. The lord chancellor, to whom, by special
authority from the king, the custody of idiots and lunatics is
intrusted[s], upon petition or information, grants a commission in
nature of the writ _de idiota inquirendo_, to enquire into the party's
state of mind; and if he be found _non compos_, he usually commits the
care of his person, with a suitable allowance for his maintenance, to
some friend, who is then called his committee. However, to prevent
sinister practices, the next heir is never permitted to be this
committee of the person; because it is his interest that the party
should die. But, it hath been said, there lies not the same objection
against his next of kin, provided he be not his heir; for it is his
interest to preserve the lunatic's life, in order to increase the
personal estate by savings, which he or his family may hereafter be
entitled to enjoy[t]. The heir is generally made the manager or
committee of the estate, it being clearly his interest by good
management to keep it in condition; accountable however to the court
of chancery, and to the _non compos_ himself, if he recovers; or
otherwise, to his administrators.

[Footnote s: 3 P. Wms. 108.]

[Footnote t: 2 P. Wms. 638.]

IN this care of idiots and lunatics the civil law agrees with ours; by
assigning them tutors to protect their persons, and curators to manage
their estates. But in another instance the Roman law goes much beyond
the English. For, if a man by notorious prodigality was in danger of
wasting his estate, he was looked upon as _non compos_ and committed
to the care of curators or tutors by the praetor[u]. And by the laws
of Solon such prodigals were branded with perpetual infamy[w]. But
with us, when a man on an inquest of idiocy hath been returned an
_unthrift_ and not an _idiot_[x], no farther proceedings have been
had. And the propriety of the practice itself seems to be very
questionable. It was doubtless an excellent method of benefiting the
individual and of preserving estates in families; but it hardly seems
calculated for the genius of a free nation, who claim and exercise the
liberty of using their own property as they please. "_Sic utere tuo,
ut alienum non laedas_," is the only restriction our laws have given
with regard to oeconomical prudence. And the frequent circulation and
transfer of lands and other property, which cannot be effected
without extravagance somewhere, are perhaps not a little conducive
towards keeping our mixed constitution in it's due health and vigour.

[Footnote u: _Solent praetores, si talem hominem invenerint, qui neque
tempus neque finem expensarum habet, sed bona sua dilacerando et
dissipando profundit, curatorem ei dare, exemplo furiosi: et tamdiu
erunt ambo in curatione, quamdiu vel furiosus sanitatem, vel ille
bonos mores, receperit._ _Ff._ 27. 10. 1.]

[Footnote w: Potter. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 26.]

[Footnote x: Bro. _Abr. tit. Ideot._ 4.]

THIS may suffice for a short view of the king's _ordinary_ revenue, or
the proper patrimony of the crown; which was very large formerly, and
capable of being increased to a magnitude truly formidable: for there
are very few estates in the kingdom, that have not, at some period or
other since the Norman conquest, been vested in the hands of the king
by forfeiture, escheat, or otherwise. But, fortunately for the liberty
of the subject, this hereditary landed revenue, by a series of
improvident management, is sunk almost to nothing; and the casual
profits, arising from the other branches of the _census regalis_, are
likewise almost all of them alienated from the crown. In order to
supply the deficiences of which, we are now obliged to have recourse
to new methods of raising money, unknown to our early ancestors; which
methods constitute the king's _extraordinary_ revenue. For, the
publick patrimony being got into the hands of private subjects, it is
but reasonable that private contributions should supply the public
service. Which, though it may perhaps fall harder upon some
individuals, whose ancestors have had no share in the general plunder,
than upon others, yet, taking the nation throughout, it amounts to
nearly the same; provided the gain by the extraordinary, should appear
to be no greater than the loss by the ordinary, revenue. And perhaps,
if every gentleman in the kingdom was to be stripped of such of his
lands as were formerly the property of the crown; was to be again
subject to the inconveniences of purveyance and pre-emption, the
oppression of forest laws, and the slavery of feodal tenures; and was
to resign into the king's hands all his royal franchises of waifs,
wrecks, estrays, treasure-trove, mines, deodands, forfeitures, and the
like; he would find himself a greater loser, than by paying his
_quota_ to such taxes, as are necessary to the support of government.
The thing therefore to be wished and aimed at in a land of liberty, is
by no means the total abolition of taxes, which would draw after it
very pernicious consequences, and the very supposition of which is the
height of political absurdity. For as the true idea of government and
magistracy will be found to consist in this, that some few men are
deputed by many others to preside over public affairs, so that
individuals may the better be enabled to attend to their private
concerns; it is necessary that those individuals should be bound to
contribute a portion of their private gains, in order to support that
government, and reward that magistracy, which protects them in the
enjoyment of their respective properties. But the things to be aimed
at are wisdom and moderation, not only in granting, but also in the
method of raising, the necessary supplies; by contriving to do both in
such a manner as may be most conducive to the national welfare and at
the same time most consistent with oeconomy and the liberty of the
subject; who, when properly taxed, contributes only, as was before
observed[y], some part of his property, in order to enjoy the rest.

[Footnote y: pag. 271.]

THESE extraordinary grants are usually called by the synonymous names
of aids, subsidies, and supplies; and are granted, we have formerly
seen[z], by the commons of Great Britain, in parliament assembled:
who, when they have voted a supply to his majesty, and settled the
_quantum_ of that supply, usually resolve themselves into what is
called a committee of ways and means, to consider of the ways and
means of raising the supply so voted. And in this committee every
member (though it is looked upon as the peculiar province of the
chancellor of the exchequer) may propose such scheme of taxation as he
thinks will be least detrimental to the public. The resolutions of
this committee (when approved by a vote of the house) are in general
esteemed to be (as it were) final and conclusive. For, through
[Transcriber's Note: though] the supply cannot be actually raised upon
the subject till directed by an act of the whole parliament, yet no
monied man will scruple to advance to the government any quantity of
ready cash, on the credit of a bare vote of the house of commons,
though no law be yet passed to establish it.

[Footnote z: pag. 163.]

THE taxes, which are raised upon the subject, are either annual or
perpetual. The usual annual taxes are those upon land and malt.

I. THE land tax, in it's modern shape, has superseded all the former
methods of rating either property, or persons in respect of their
property, whether by tenths or fifteenths, subsidies on land, hydages,
scutages, or talliages; a short explication of which will greatly
assist us in understanding our antient laws and history.

TENTHS, and fifteenths[a], were temporary aids issuing out of personal
property, and granted to the king by parliament. They were formerly
the real tenth or fifteenth part of all the moveables belonging to the
subject; when such moveables, or personal estates, were a very
different and a much less considerable thing than what they usually
are at this day. Tenths are said to have been first granted under
Henry the second, who took advantage of the fashionable zeal for
croisades to introduce this new taxation, in order to defray the
expense of a pious expedition to Palestine, which he really or
seemingly had projected against Saladine emperor of the Saracens;
whence it was originally denominated the Saladine tenth[b]. But
afterwards fifteenths were more usually granted than tenths.
Originally the amount of these taxes was uncertain, being levied by
assessments new made at every fresh grant of the commons, a commission
for which is preserved by Matthew Paris[c]: but it was at length
reduced to a certainty in the eighth of Edw. III. when, by virtue of
the king's commission, new taxations were made of every township,
borough, and city in the kingdom, and recorded in the exchequer; which
rate was, at the time, the fifteenth part of the value of every
township, the whole amounting to about 29000_l._ and therefore it
still kept up the name of a fifteenth, when, by the alteration of the
value of money and the encrease of personal property, things came to
be in a very different situation. So that when, of later years, the
commons granted the king a fifteenth, every parish in England
immediately knew their proportion of it; that is, the same identical
sum that was assessed by the same aid in the eighth of Edw. III; and
then raised it by a rate among themselves, and returned it into the
royal exchequer.

[Footnote a: 2 Inst. 77. 4 Inst. 34.]

[Footnote b: Hoved. _A.D._ 1188. Carte. 1. 719. Hume. 1. 329.]

[Footnote c: _A.D._ 1232.]

THE other antient levies were in the nature of a modern land tax; for
we may trace up the original of that charge as high as to the
introduction of our military tenures[d]; when every tenant of a
knight's fee was bound, if called upon, to attend the king in his army
for forty days in every year. But this personal attendance growing
troublesome in many respects, the tenants found means of compounding
for it, by first sending others in their stead, and in process of time
by making a pecuniary satisfaction to the crown in lieu of it. This
pecuniary satisfaction at last came to be levied by assessments, at so
much for every knight's fee, under the name of scutages; which appear
to have been levied for the first time in the fifth year of Henry the
second, on account of his expedition to Toulouse, and were then (I
apprehend) mere arbitrary compositions, as the king and the subject
could agree. But this precedent being afterwards abused into a means
of oppression, (by levying scutages on the landholders by the royal
authority only, whenever our kings went to war, in order to hire
mercenary troops and pay their contingent expences) it became
thereupon a matter of national complaint; and king John was obliged to
promise in his _magna carta_[e], that no scutage should be imposed
without the consent of the common council of the realm. This clause
was indeed omitted in the charters of Henry III, where[f] we only find
it stipulated, that scutages should be taken as they were used to be
in the time of king Henry the second. Yet afterwards, by a variety of
statutes under Edward I and his grandson[g], it was provided, that
the king shall not take any aids or tasks, any talliage or tax, but by
the common assent of the great men and commons in parliament.

[Footnote d: See the second book of these commentaries.]

[Footnote e: _cap._ 14.]

[Footnote f: 9 Hen. III. c. 37.]

[Footnote g: 25 Edw. I. c. 5 & 6. 34 Edw. I. st. 4. c. 1. 14 Edw. III.
st. 2. c. 1.]

OF the same nature with scutages upon knights-fees were the
assessments of hydage upon all other lands, and of talliage upon
cities and burghs[h]. But they all gradually fell into disuse, upon
the introduction of subsidies, about the time of king Richard II and
king Henry IV. These were a tax, not immediately imposed upon
property, but upon persons in respect of their reputed estates, after
the nominal rate of 4_s._ in the pound for lands, and 2_s._ 6_d._ for
goods; and for those of aliens in a double proportion. But this
assessment was also made according to an antient valuation; wherein
the computation was so very moderate, and the rental of the kingdom
was supposed to be so exceeding low, that one subsidy of this sort did
not, according to sir Edward Coke[i], amount to more than 70000_l._
whereas a modern land tax at the same rate produces two millions. It
was antiently the rule never to grant more than one subsidy, and two
fifteenths at a time; but this rule was broke through for the first
time on a very pressing occasion, the Spanish invasion in 1588; when
the parliament gave queen Elizabeth two subsidies and four fifteenths.
Afterwards, as money sunk in value, more subsidies were given; and we
have an instance in the first parliament of 1640, of the king's
desiring twelve subsidies of the commons, to be levied in three years;
which was looked upon as a startling proposal: though lord Clarendon
tells us[k], that the speaker, serjeant Glanvile, made it manifest to
the house, how very inconsiderable a sum twelve subsidies amounted to,
by telling them he had computed what he was to pay for them; and, when
he named the sum, he being known to be possessed of a great estate, it
seemed not worth any farther deliberation. And indeed, upon
calculation, we shall find, that the total amount of these twelve
subsidies, to be raised in three years, is less than what is now
raised in one year, by a land tax of two shillings in the pound.

[Footnote h: Madox. hist. exch. 480.]

[Footnote i: 4 Inst. 33.]

[Footnote k: Hist. b. 2.]

THE grant of scutages, talliages, or subsidies by the commons did not
extend to spiritual preferments; those being usually taxed at the same
time by the clergy themselves in convocation; which grants of the
clergy were confirmed in parliament, otherwise they were illegal, and
not binding; as the same noble writer observes of the subsidies
granted by the convocation, who continued sitting after the
dissolution of the first parliament in 1640. A subsidy granted by the
clergy was after the rate of 4_s._ in the pound according to the
valuation of their livings in the king's books; and amounted, sir
Edward Coke tells us[l], to about 20000_l._ While this custom
continued, convocations were wont to sit as frequently as parliaments:
but the last subsidies, thus given by the clergy, were those confirmed
by statute 15 Car. II. cap. 10. since which another method of taxation
has generally prevailed, which takes in the clergy as well as the
laity; in recompense for which the beneficed clergy have from that
period been allowed to vote at the elections of knights of the
shire[m]; and thenceforward also the practice of giving ecclesiastical
subsidies hath fallen into total disuse.

[Footnote l: 4 Inst 33.]

[Footnote m: Dalt. of sheriffs, 418. Gilb. hist. of exch. c. 4.]

THE lay subsidy was usually raised by commissioners appointed by the
crown, or the great officers of state: and therefore in the beginning
of the civil wars between Charles I and his parliament, the latter,
having no other sufficient revenue to support themselves and their
measures, introduced the practice of laying weekly and monthly
assessments[n] of a specific sum upon the several counties of the
kingdom; to be levied by a pound rate on lands and personal estates:
which were occasionally continued during the whole usurpation,
sometimes at the rate of 120000_l._ a month; sometimes at inferior
rates[o]. After the restoration the antient method of granting
subsidies, instead of such monthly assessments, was twice, and twice
only, renewed; viz. in 1663, when four subsidies were granted by the
temporalty, and four by the clergy; and in 1670, when 800000_l._ was
raised by way of subsidy, which was the last time of raising supplies
in that manner. For, the monthly assessments being now established by
custom, being raised by commissioners named by parliament, and
producing a more certain revenue; from that time forwards we hear no
more of subsidies; but occasional assessments were granted as the
national emergencies required. These periodical assessments, the
subsidies which preceded them, and the more antient scutage, hydage,
and talliage, were to all intents and purposes a land tax; and the
assessments were sometimes expressly called so[p]. Yet a popular
opinion has prevailed, that the land tax was first introduced in the
reign of king William III; because in the year 1692 a new assessment
or valuation of estates was made throughout the kingdom; which, though
by no means a perfect one, had this effect, that a supply of
500000_l._ was equal to 1_s._ in the pound of the value of the estates
given in. And, according to this enhanced valuation, from the year
1693 to the present, a period of above seventy years, the land tax has
continued an annual charge upon the subject; above half the time at
4_s._ in the pound, sometimes at 3_s_, sometimes at 2_s_, twice[q] at
1_s_, but without any total intermission. The medium has been 3_s._
3_d._ in the pound, being equivalent to twenty three antient
subsidies, and amounting annually to more than a million and an half
of money. The method of raising it is by charging a particular sum
upon each county, according to the valuation given in, _A.D._ 1692:
and this sum is assessed and raised upon individuals (their personal
estates, as well as real, being liable thereto) by commissioners
appointed in the act, being the principal landholders of the county,
and their officers.

[Footnote n: 29 Nov. 4 Mar. 1642.]

[Footnote o: One of these bills of assessment, in 1656, is preserved
in Scobell's collection, 400.]

[Footnote p: Com. Journ. 26 Jun. 9 Dec. 1678.]

[Footnote q: in the years 1732 and 1733.]

II. THE other annual tax is the malt tax; which is a sum of 750000_l_,
raised every year by parliament, ever since 1697, by a duty of 6_d._
in the bushel on malt, and a proportionable sum on certain liquors,
such as cyder and perry, which might otherwise prevent the consumption
of malt. This is under the management of the commissioners of the
excise; and is indeed itself no other than an annual excise, the
nature of which species of taxation I shall presently explain: only
premising at present, that in the year 1760 an additional perpetual
excise of 3_d._ _per_ bushel was laid upon malt; and in 1763 a
proportionable excise was laid upon cyder and perry.

THE perpetual taxes are,

I. THE customs; or the duties, toll, tribute, or tariff, payable upon
merchandize exported and imported. The considerations upon which this
revenue (or the more antient part of it, which arose only from
exports) was invested in the king, were said to be two[r]; 1. Because
he gave the subject leave to depart the kingdom, and to carry his
goods along with him. 2. Because the king was bound of common right to
maintain and keep up the ports and havens, and to protect the merchant
from pirates. Some have imagined they are called with us customs,
because they were the inheritance of the king by immemorial usage and
the common law, and not granted him by any statute[s]: but sir Edward
Coke hath clearly shewn[t], that the king's first claim to them was by
grant of parliament 3 Edw. I. though the record thereof is not now
extant. And indeed this is in express words confessed by statute 25
Edw. I. c. 7. wherein the king promises to take no customs from
merchants, without the common assent of the realm, "saving to us and
our heirs, the customs on wools, skins, and leather, formerly granted
to us by the commonalty aforesaid." These were formerly called the
hereditary customs of the crown; and were due on the exportation only
of the said three commodities, and of none other: which were stiled
the _staple_ commodities of the kingdom, because they were obliged to
be brought to those ports where the king's staple was established, in
order to be there first rated, and then exported[u]. They were
denominated in the barbarous Latin of our antient records,
_custuma_[w]; not _consuetudines_, which is the language of our law
whenever it means merely usages. The duties on wool, sheep-skins, or
woolfells, and leather, exported, were called _custuma antiqua sive
magna_; and were payable by every merchant, as well native as
stranger; with this difference, that merchant-strangers paid an
additional toll, _viz._ half as much again as was paid by natives. The
_custuma parva et nova_ were an impost of 3_d._ in the pound, due from
merchant-strangers only, for all commodities as well imported as
exported; which was usually called the alien's duty, and was first
granted in 31 Edw. I[x]. But these antient hereditary customs,
especially those on wool and woolfells, came to be of little account
when the nation became sensible of the advantages of a home
manufacture, and prohibited the exportation of wool by statute 11 Edw.
III. c. 1.

[Footnote r: Dyer. 165.]

[Footnote s: Dyer. 43. _pl._ 24.]

[Footnote t: 2 Inst. 58, 59.]

[Footnote u: Dav. 9.]

[Footnote w: This appellation seems to be derived from the French word
_coustum_, or _coûtum_, which signifies toll or tribute, and owes it's
own etymology to the word _coust_, which signifies price, charge, or,
as we have adopted it in English, _cost_.]

[Footnote x: 4 Inst. 29.]

THERE is also another antient hereditary duty belonging to the crown,
called the _prisage_ or _butlerage_ of wines. Prisage was a right of
_taking_ two tons of wine from every ship importing into England
twenty tons or more; which by Edward I was exchanged into a duty of
2_s._ for every ton imported by merchant-strangers; which is called
butlerage, because paid to the king's butler[y].

[Footnote y: Dav. 8. _b._ 2 Bulstr. 254.]

OTHER customs payable upon exports and imports are distinguished into
subsidies, tonnage, poundage, and other imposts. Subsidies are such as
were imposed by parliament upon any of the staple commodities before
mentioned, over and above the _custuma antiqua et magna_: tonnage was
a duty upon all wines imported, over and above the prisage and
butlerage aforesaid: poundage was a duty imposed _ad valorem_, at the
rate of 12_d._ in the pound, on all other merchandize whatsoever: and
the other imports were such as were occasionally laid on by
parliament, as circumstances and times required[z]. These distinctions
are now in a manner forgotten, except by the officers immediately
concerned in this department; their produce being in effect all
blended together, under the one denomination of the customs.

[Footnote z: Dav. 11, 12.]

BY these we understand, at present, a duty or subsidy paid by the
merchant, at the quay, upon all imported as well as exported
commodities, by authority of parliament; unless where, for particular
national reasons, certain rewards, bounties, or drawbacks, are allowed
for particular exports or imports. Those of tonnage and poundage, in
particular, were at first granted, as the old statutes, and
particularly 1 Eliz. c. 19. express it, for the defence of the realm,
and the keeping and safeguard of the seas, and for the intercourse of
merchandize safely to come into and pass out of the same. They were at
first usually granted only for a stated term of years, as, for two
years in 5 Ric. II[a]; but in Henry the fifth's time, they were
granted him for life by a statute in the third year of his reign; and
again to Edward IV for the term of his life also: since which time
they were regularly granted to all his successors, for life, sometimes
at their first, sometimes at other subsequent parliaments, till the
reign of Charles the first; when, as had before happened in the reign
of Henry VIII[b] and other princes, they were neglected to be asked.
And yet they were imprudently and unconstitutionally levied and taken
without consent of parliament, (though more than one had been
assembled) for fifteen years together; which was one of the causes of
those unhappy discontents, justifiable at first in too many instances,
but which degenerated at last into causeless rebellion and murder.
For, as in every other, so in this particular case, the king (previous
to the commencement of hostilities) gave the nation ample satisfaction
for the errors of his former conduct, by passing an act[c], whereby he
renounced all power in the crown of levying the duty of tonnage and
poundage, without the express consent of parliament; and also all
power of imposition upon any merchandizes whatever. Upon the
restoration this duty was granted to king Charles the second for life,
and so it was to his two immediate successors; but now by three
several statutes, 9 Ann. c. 6. 1 Geo. I. c. 12. and 3 Geo. I. c. 7. it
is made perpetual and mortgaged for the debt of the publick. The
customs, thus imposed by parliament, are chiefly contained in two
books of rates, set forth by parliamentary authority[d]; one signed by
sir Harbottle Grimston, speaker of the house of commons in Charles the
second's time; and the other an additional one signed by sir Spenser
Compton, speaker in the reign of George the first; to which also
subsequent additions have been made. Aliens pay a larger proportion
than natural subjects, which is what is now generally understood by
the aliens' duty; to be exempted from which is one principal cause of
the frequent applications to parliament for acts of naturalization.

[Footnote a: Dav. 12.]

[Footnote b: Stat. 6 Hen. VIII. c. 14.]

[Footnote c: 16 Car. I. c. 8.]

[Footnote d: Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 4. 11 Geo. I. c. 7.]

THESE customs are then, we see, a tax immediately paid by the
merchant, although ultimately by the consumer. And yet these are the
duties felt least by the people; and, if prudently managed, the people
hardly consider that they pay them at all. For the merchant is easy,
being sensible he does not pay them for himself; and the consumer, who
really pays them, confounds them with the price of the commodity: in
the same manner as Tacitus observes, that the emperor Nero gained the
reputation of abolishing the tax on the sale of slaves, though he only
transferred it from the buyer to the seller; so that it was, as he
expresses it, "_remissum magis specie, quam vi: quia cum venditor
pendere juberetur, in partem pretii emptoribus accrescebat_[e]." But
this inconvenience attends it on the other hand, that these imposts,
if too heavy, are a check and cramp upon trade; and especially when
the value of the commodity bears little or no proportion to the
quantity of the duty imposed. This in consequence gives rise also to
smuggling, which then becomes a very lucrative employment: and it's
natural and most reasonable punishment, _viz._ confiscation of the
commodity, is in such cases quite ineffectual; the intrinsic value of
the goods, which is all that the smuggler has paid, and therefore all
that he can lose, being very inconsiderable when compared with his
prospect of advantage in evading the duty. Recourse must therefore be
had to extraordinary punishments to prevent it; perhaps even to
capital ones: which destroys all proportion of punishment[f], and puts
murderers upon an equal footing with such as are really guilty of no
natural, but merely a positive offence.

[Footnote e: Hist. l. 13.]

[Footnote f: Montesqu. Sp. L. b. 13. c. 8.]

THERE is also another ill consequence attending high imports on
merchandize, not frequently considered, but indisputably certain; that
the earlier any tax is laid on a commodity, the heavier it falls upon
the consumer in the end: for every trader, through whose hands it
passes, must have a profit, not only upon the raw material and his own
labour and time in preparing it, but also upon the very tax itself,
which he advances to the government; otherwise he loses the use and
interest of the money which he so advances. To instance in the article
of foreign paper. The merchant pays a duty upon importation, which he
does not receive again till he sells the commodity, perhaps at the end
of three months. He is therefore equally entitled to a profit upon
that duty which he pays at the customhouse, as to a profit upon the
original price which he pays to the manufacturer abroad; and considers
it accordingly in the price he demands of the stationer. When the
stationer sells it again, he requires a profit of the printer or
bookseller upon the whole sum advanced by him to the merchant: and the
bookseller does not forget to charge the full proportion to the
student or ultimate consumer; who therefore does not only pay the
original duty, but the profits of these three intermediate traders,
who have successively advanced it for him. This might be carried much
farther in any mechanical, or more complicated, branch of trade.

II. DIRECTLY opposite in it's nature to this is the excise duty; which
is an inland imposition, paid sometimes upon the consumption of the
commodity, or frequently upon the retail sale, which is the last stage
before the consumption. This is doubtless, impartially speaking, the
most oeconomical way of taxing the subject: the charges of levying,
collecting, and managing the excise duties being considerably less in
proportion, than in any other branch of the revenue. It also renders
the commodity cheaper to the consumer, than charging it with customs
to the same amount would do; for the reason just now given, because
generally paid in a much later stage of it. But, at the same time, the
rigour and arbitrary proceedings of excise-laws seem hardly compatible
with the temper of a free nation. For the frauds that might be
committed in this branch of the revenue, unless a strict watch is
kept, make it necessary, wherever it is established, to give the
officers a power of entring and searching the houses of such as deal
in excisable commodities, at any hour of the day, and, in many cases,
of the night likewise. And the proceedings in case of transgressions
are so summary and sudden, that a man may be convicted in two days
time in the penalty of many thousand pounds by two commissioners or
justices of the peace; to the total exclusion of the trial by jury,
and disregard of the common law. For which reason, though lord
Clarendon tells us[g], that to his knowlege the earl of Bedford (who
was made lord treasurer by king Charles the first, to oblige his
parliament) intended to have set up the excise in England, yet it
never made a part of that unfortunate prince's revenue; being first
introduced, on the model of the Dutch prototype, by the parliament
itself after it's rupture with the crown. Yet such was the opinion of
it's general unpopularity, that when in 1642 "aspersions were cast by
malignant persons upon the house of commons, that they intended to
introduce excises, the house for it's vindication therein did declare,
that these rumours were false and scandalous; and that their authors
should be apprehended and brought to condign punishment[h]." It's
original establishment was in 1643, and it's progress was gradual[i];
being at first laid upon those persons and commodities, where it was
supposed the hardship would be least perceivable, _viz._ the makers
and venders of beer, ale, cyder, and perry[k]; and the royalists at
Oxford soon followed the example of their brethren at Westminster by
imposing a similar duty; both sides protesting that it should be
continued no longer than to the end of the war, and then be utterly
abolished[l]. But the parliament at Westminster soon after imposed it
on flesh, wine, tobacco, sugar, and such a multitude of other
commodities that it might fairly be denominated general; in pursuance
of the plan laid down by Mr Pymme (who seems to have been the father
of the excise) in his letter to sir John Hotham[m], signifying, "that
they had proceeded in the excise to many particulars, and intended to
go on farther; but that it would be necessary to use the people to it
by little and little." And afterwards, when the people had been
accustomed to it for a series of years, the succeeding champions of
liberty boldly and openly declared, "the impost of excise to be the
most easy and indifferent levy that could be laid upon the people[n]:"
and accordingly continued it during the whole usurpation. Upon king
Charles's return, it having then been long established and it's
produce well known, some part of it was given to the crown, in the 12
Car. II, by way of purchase (as was before observed) for the feodal
tenures and other oppressive parts of the hereditary revenue. But,
from it's first original to the present time, it's very name has been
odious to the people of England. It has nevertheless been imposed on
abundance of other commodities in the reigns of king William III, and
every succeeding prince, to support the enormous expenses occasioned
by our wars on the continent. Thus brandies and other spirits are now
excised at the distillery; printed silks and linens, at the printers;
starch and hair powder, at the maker's; gold and silver wire, at the
wiredrawer's; all plate whatsoever, first in the hands of the vendor,
who pays yearly for a licence to sell it, and afterwards in the hands
of the occupier, who also pays an annual duty for having it in his
custody; and coaches and other wheel carriages, for which the occupier
is excised; though not with the same circumstances of arbitrary
strictness with regard to plate and coaches, as in the other
instances. To these we may add coffee and tea, chocolate, and cocoa
paste, for which the duty is paid by the retailer; all artificial
wines, commonly called sweets; paper and pasteboard, first when made,
and again if stained or printed; malt as before-mentioned; vinegars;
and the manufacture of glass; for all which the duty is paid by the
manufacturer; hops, for which the person that gathers them is
answerable; candles and soap, which are paid for at the maker's; malt
liquors brewed for sale, which are excised at the brewery; cyder and
perry, at the mill; and leather and skins, at the tanner's. A list,
which no friend to his country would wish to see farther encreased.

[Footnote g: Hist. b. 3.]

[Footnote h: Com. Journ. 8 Oct. 1642.]

[Footnote i: The translator and continuator of Petavius's
chronological history (Lond. 1659.) informs us, that it was first
moved for, 28 Mar. 1643, by Mr Prynne. And it appears from the
journals of the commons that on that day the house resolved itself
into a committee to consider of raising money, in consequence of which
the excise was afterwards voted. But Mr Prynne was not a member of
parliament till 7 Nov. 1648; and published in 1654 "A protestation
against the illegal, detestable, and oft-condemned tax and extortion
of excise in general." It is probably therefore a mistake of the
printer for Mr Pymme, who was intended for chancellor of the exchequer
under the earl of Bedford. (Lord Clar. b. 7.)]

[Footnote k: Com. Journ. 17 May 1643.]

[Footnote l: Lord Clar. b. 7.]

[Footnote m: 30 May 1643. Dugdale of the troubles, 120.]

[Footnote n: Ord. 14 Aug. 1649. c. 50. Scobell. 72. Stat. 1656. c. 19.
Scobell. 453.]

III. I PROCEED therefore to a third duty, namely that upon salt; which
is another distinct branch of his majesty's extraordinary revenue, and
consists in an excise of 3_s._ 4_d._ _per_ bushel imposed upon all
salt, by several statutes of king William and other subsequent reigns.
This is not generally called an excise, because under the management
of different commissioners: but the commissioners of the salt duties
have by statute 1 Ann. c. 21. the same powers, and must observe the
same regulations, as those of other excises. This tax had usually been
only temporary; but by statute 26 Geo. II. c. 3. was made perpetual.

IV. ANOTHER very considerable branch of the revenue is levied with
greater chearfulness, as, instead of being a burden, it is a manifest
advantage to the public. I mean the post-office, or duty for the
carriage of letters. As we have traced the original of the excise to
the parliament of 1643, so it is but justice to observe that this
useful invention owes it's birth to the same assembly. It is true,
there existed postmasters in much earlier times: but I apprehend their
business was confined to the furnishing of posthorses to persons who
were desirous to travel expeditiously, and to the dispatching
extraordinary pacquets upon special occasions. The outline of the
present plan seems to have been originally conceived by Mr Edmond
Prideaux, who was appointed attorney general to the commonwealth after
the murder of king Charles. He was a chairman of a committee in 1642
for considering what rates should be set upon inland letters[o]; and
afterwards appointed postmaster by an ordinance of both the houses[p],
in the execution of which office he first established a weekly
conveyance of letters into all parts of the nation[q]: thereby saving
to the public the charge of maintaining postmasters, to the amount of
7000_l._ _per annum_. And, his own emoluments being probably
considerable, the common council of London endeavoured to erect
another post-office in opposition to his, till checked by a resolution
of the commons[r], declaring, that the office of postmaster is and
ought to be in the sole power and disposal of the parliament. This
office was afterwards farmed by one Manley in 1654[s]. But, in 1657, a
regular post-office was erected by the authority of the protector and
his parliament, upon nearly the same model as has been ever since
adopted, with the same rates of postage as were continued till the
reign of queen Anne[t]. After the restoration a similar office, with
some improvements, was established by statute 12 Car. II. c. 35. but
the rates of letters were altered, and some farther regulations added,
by the statutes 9 Ann. c. 10. 6 Geo. I. c. 21. 26 Geo. II. c. 12. and
5 Geo. III. c. 25. and penalties were enacted, in order to confine the
carriage of letters to the public office only, except in some few
cases: a provision, which is absolutely necessary; for nothing but an
exclusive right can support an office of this sort: many rival
independent offices would only serve to ruin one another. The
privilege of letters coming free of postage, to and from members of
parliament, was claimed by the house of commons in 1660, when the
first legal settlement of the present post-office was made[u]; but
afterwards dropped[w] upon a private assurance from the crown, that
this privilege should be allowed the members[x]. And accordingly a
warrant was constantly issued to the postmaster-general[y], directing
the allowance thereof, to to [Transcriber's Note: duplicate word] the
extent of two ounces in weight: till at length it was expressly
confirmed by statute 4 Geo. III. c. 24; which adds many new
regulations, rendered necessary by the great abuses crept into the
practice of franking; whereby the annual amount of franked letters had
gradually increased, from 23600_l._ in the year 1715, to 170700_l._ in
the year 1763[z]. There cannot be devised a more eligible method, than
this, of raising money upon the subject: for therein both the
government and the people find a mutual benefit. The government
acquires a large revenue; and the people do their business with
greater ease, expedition, and cheapness, than they would be able to do
if no such tax (and of course no such office) existed.

[Footnote o: Com. Journ. 28 Mar. 1642.]

[Footnote p: _Ibid._ 7 Sept. 1644.]

[Footnote q: _Ibid._ 21 Mar. 1649.]

[Footnote r: _Ibid._]

[Footnote s: Scobell. 358.]

[Footnote t: Com. Journ. 9 Jun. 1657. Scobell. 511.]

[Footnote u: Com. Journ. 17 Dec. 1660.]

[Footnote w: _Ibid._ 22 Dec. 1660.]

[Footnote x: _Ibid._ 16 Apr. 1735.]

[Footnote y: _Ibid._ 26 Feb. 1734.]

[Footnote z: _Ibid._ 28 Mar. 1764.]

V. A FIFTH branch of the perpetual revenue consists in the stamp
duties, which are a tax imposed upon all parchment and paper whereon
any legal proceedings, or private instruments of almost any nature
whatsoever, are written; and also upon licences for retailing wines,
of all denominations; upon all almanacks, newspapers, advertisements,
cards, dice, and pamphlets containing less than six sheets of paper.
These imposts are very various, according to the nature of the thing
stamped, rising gradually from a penny to ten pounds. This is also a
tax, which though in some instances it may be heavily felt, by greatly
increasing the expence of all mercantile as well as legal proceedings,
yet (if moderately imposed) is of service to the public in general, by
authenticating instruments, and rendering it much more difficult than
formerly to forge deeds of any standing; since, as the officers of
this branch of the revenue vary their stamps frequently, by marks
perceptible to none but themselves, a man that would forge a deed of
king William's time, must know and be able to counterfeit the stamp of
that date also. In France and some other countries the duty is laid on
the contract itself, not on the instrument in which it is contained:
but this draws the subject into a thousand nice disquisitions and
disputes concerning the nature of his contract, and whether taxable or
not; in which the farmers of the revenue are sure to have the
advantage. Our method answers the purposes of the state as well, and
consults the ease of the subject much better. The first institution of
the stamp duties was by statute 5 & 6 W. & M. c. 21. and they have
since in many instances been encreased to five times their original
amount.

VI. A SIXTH branch is the duty upon houses and windows. As early as
the conquest mention is made in domesday book of fumage or fuage,
vulgarly called smoke farthings; which were paid by custom to the king
for every chimney in the house. And we read that Edward the black
prince (soon after his successes in France) in imitation of the
English custom, imposed a tax of a florin upon every hearth in his
French dominions[a]. But the first parliamentary establishment of it
in England was by statute 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 10. whereby an
hereditary revenue of 2_s._ for every hearth, in all houses paying to
church and poor, was granted to the king for ever. And, by subsequent
statutes, for the more regular assessment of this tax, the constable
and two other substantial inhabitants of the parish, to be appointed
yearly, were, once in every year, empowered to view the inside of
every house in the parish. But, upon the revolution, by statute 1 W.
& M. st. 1. c. 10. hearth-money was declared to be "not only a great
oppression to the poorer sort, but a badge of slavery upon the whole
people, exposing every man's house to be entered into, and searched at
pleasure, by persons unknown to him; and therefore, to erect a lasting
monument of their majesties' goodness in every house in the kingdom,
the duty of hearth-money was taken away and abolished." This monument
of goodness remains among us to this day: but the prospect of it was
somewhat darkened when, in six years afterwards, by statute 7 W. III.
c. 18. a tax was laid upon all houses (except cottages) of 2_s._ now
advanced to 3_s._ _per_ house, and a tax also upon all windows, if
they exceed nine, in such house. Which rates have been from time to
time varied, (particularly by statutes 20 Geo. II. c. 3. and 31 Geo.
II. c. 22.) and power is given to surveyors, appointed by the crown,
to inspect the outside of houses, and also to pass through any house
two days in the year, into any court or yard to inspect the windows
there.

[Footnote a: Mod. Un. Hist. xxiii. 463. Spelm. Gloss. _tit. Fuage_.]

VII. THE seventh branch of the extraordinary perpetual revenue is the
duty arising from licences to hackney coaches and chairs in London,
and the parts adjacent. In 1654 two hundred hackney coaches were
allowed within London, Westminster, and six miles round, under the
direction of the court of aldermen[b]. By statute 13 & 14 Car. II. c.
2. four hundred were licensed; and the money arising thereby was
applied to repairing the streets[c]. This number was increased to
seven hundred by statute 5 W. & M. c. 22. and the duties vested in the
crown: and by the statute 9 Ann. c. 23. and other subsequent
statutes[d], there are now eight hundred licensed coaches and four
hundred chairs. This revenue is governed by commissioners of it's own,
and is, in truth, a benefit to the subject; as the expense of it is
felt by no individual, and it's necessary regulations have established
a competent jurisdiction, whereby a very refractory race of men may
be kept in some tolerable order.

[Footnote b: Scobell. 313.]

[Footnote c: Com. Journ. 14 Feb. 1661.]

[Footnote d: 10 Ann. c. 19. §. 158. 12 Geo. I. c. 15. 33 Geo. II. c.
25.]

VIII. THE eighth and last branch of the king's extraordinary perpetual
revenue is the duty upon offices and pensions; consisting in a payment
of 1_s._ in the pound (over and above all other duties) out of all
salaries, fees, and perquisites, of offices and pensions payable by
the crown. This highly popular taxation was imposed by statute 31 Geo.
II. c. 22. and is under the direction of the commissioners of the land
tax.

THE clear neat produce of these several branches of the revenue, after
all charges of collecting and management paid, amounts annually to
about seven millions and three quarters sterling; besides two millions
and a quarter raised annually, at an average, by the land and malt
tax. How these immense sums are appropriated, is next to be
considered. And this is, first and principally, to the payment of the
interest of the national debt.

IN order to take a clear and comprehensive view of the nature of this
national debt, it must first be premised, that after the revolution,
when our new connections with Europe introduced a new system of
foreign politics, the expenses of the nation, not only in settling the
new establishment, but in maintaining long wars, as principals, on the
continent, for the security of the Dutch barrier, reducing the French
monarchy, settling the Spanish succession, supporting the house of
Austria, maintaining the liberties of the Germanic body, and other
purposes, increased to an unusual degree: insomuch that it was not
thought advisable to raise all the expenses of any one year by taxes
to be levied within that year, lest the unaccustomed weight of them
should create murmurs among the people. It was therefore the policy of
the times, to anticipate the revenues of their posterity, by borrowing
immense sums for the current service of the state, and to lay no more
taxes upon the subject than would suffice to pay the annual interest
of the sums so borrowed: by this means converting the principal debt
into a new species of property, transferrable from one man to another
at any time and in any quantity. A system which seems to have had it's
original in the state of Florence, _A.D._ 1344: which government then
owed about 60000_l._ sterling; and, being unable to pay it, formed the
principal into an aggregate sum, called metaphorically a _mount_ or
_bank_, the shares whereof were transferrable like our stocks, with
interest at 5 _per cent._ the prices varying according to the
exigencies of the state[e]. This laid the foundation of what is called
the national debt: for a few long annuities created in the reign of
Charles II will hardly deserve that name. And the example then set has
been so closely followed during the long wars in the reign of queen
Anne, and since, that the capital of the national debt, (funded and
unfunded) amounted in January 1765 to upwards of 145,000,000_l._ to
pay the interest of which, and the charges for management, amounting
annually to about four millions and three quarters, the revenues just
enumerated are in the first place mortgaged, and made perpetual by
parliament. Perpetual, I say; but still redeemable by the same
authority that imposed them: which, if it at any time can pay off the
capital, will abolish those taxes which are raised to discharge the
interest.

[Footnote e: _Pro tempore, pro spe, pro commodo, minuitur eorum
pretium atque augescit._ Aretin. See Mod. Un. Hist. xxxvi. 116.]

BY this means the quantity of property in the kingdom is greatly
encreased in idea, compared with former times; yet, if we coolly
consider it, not at all encreased in reality. We may boast of large
fortunes, and quantities of money in the funds. But where does this
money exist? It exists only in name, in paper, in public faith, in
parliamentary security: and that is undoubtedly sufficient for the
creditors of the public to rely on. But then what is the pledge which
the public faith has pawned for the security of these debts? The land,
the trade, and the personal industry of the subject; from which the
money must arise that supplies the several taxes. In these therefore,
and these only, the property of the public creditors does really and
intrinsically exist: and of course the land, the trade, and the
personal industry of individuals, are diminished in their true value
just so much as they are pledged to answer. If A's income amounts to
100_l._ _per annum_; and he is so far indebted to B, that he pays him
50_l._ _per annum_ for his interest; one half of the value of A's
property is transferred to B the creditor. The creditor's property
exists in the demand which he has upon the debtor, and no where else;
and the debtor is only a trustee to his creditor for one half of the
value of his income. In short, the property of a creditor of the
publick, consists in a certain portion of the national taxes: by how
much therefore he is the richer, by so much the nation, which pays
these taxes, is the poorer.

THE only advantage, that can result to a nation from public debts, is
the encrease of circulation by multiplying the cash of the kingdom,
and creating a new species of money, always ready to be employed in
any beneficial undertaking, by means of it's transferrable quality;
and yet productive of some profit, even when it lies idle and
unemployed. A certain proportion of debt seems therefore to be highly
useful to a trading people; but what that proportion is, it is not for
me to determine. Thus much is indisputably certain, that the present
magnitude of our national incumbrances very far exceeds all
calculations of commercial benefit, and is productive of the greatest
inconveniences. For, first, the enormous taxes, that are raised upon
the necessaries of life for the payment of the interest of this debt,
are a hurt both to trade and manufactures, by raising the price as
well of the artificer's subsistence, as of the raw material, and of
course, in a much greater proportion, the price of the commodity
itself. Secondly, if part of this debt be owing to foreigners, either
they draw out of the kingdom annually a considerable quantity of
specie for the interest; or else it is made an argument to grant them
unreasonable privileges in order to induce them to reside here.
Thirdly, if the whole be owing to subjects only, it is then charging
the active and industrious subject, who pays his share of the taxes,
to maintain the indolent and idle creditor who receives them. Lastly,
and principally, it weakens the internal strength of a state, by
anticipating those resources which should be reserved to defend it in
case of necessity. The interest we now pay for our debts would be
nearly sufficient to maintain any war, that any national motives could
require. And if our ancestors in king William's time had annually
paid, so long as their exigences lasted, even a less sum than we now
annually raise upon their accounts, they would in the time of war have
borne no greater burdens, than they have bequeathed to and settled
upon their posterity in time of peace; and might have been eased the
instant the exigence was over.

THE produce of the several taxes beforementioned were originally
separate and distinct funds; being securities for the sums advanced on
each several tax, and for them only. But at last it became necessary,
in order to avoid confusion, as they multiplied yearly, to reduce the
number of these separate funds, by uniting and blending them together;
superadding the faith of parliament for the general security of the
whole. So that there are now only three capital funds of any account,
the _aggregate_ fund, and the _general_ fund, so called from such
union and addition; and the _south sea_ fund, being the produce of the
taxes appropriated to pay the interest of such part of the national
debt as was advanced by that company and it's annuitants. Whereby the
separate funds, which were thus united, are become mutual securities
for each other; and the whole produce of them, thus aggregated, is
liable to pay such interest or annuities as were formerly charged upon
each distinct fund; the faith of the legislature being moreover
engaged to supply any casual deficiences.

THE customs, excises, and other taxes, which are to support these
funds, depending on contingencies, upon exports, imports, and
consumptions, must necessarily be of a very uncertain amount; but they
have always been considerably more than was sufficient to answer the
charge upon them. The surplusses therefore of the three great national
funds, the aggregate, general, and south sea funds, over and above
the interest and annuities charged upon them, are directed by statute
3 Geo. I. c. 7. to be carried together, and to attend the disposition
of parliament; and are usually denominated the _sinking_ fund, because
originally destined to sink and lower the national debt. To this have
been since added many other intire duties, granted in subsequent
years; and the annual interest of the sums borrowed on their
respective credits is charged on and payable out of the produce of the
sinking fund. However the neat surplusses and savings, after all
deductions paid, amount annually to a very considerable sum;
particularly in the year ending at Christmas 1764, to about two
millions and a quarter. For, as the interest on the national debt has
been at several times reduced, (by the consent of the proprietors, who
had their option either to lower their interest or be paid their
principal) the savings from the appropriated revenues must needs be
extremely large. This sinking fund is the last resort of the nation;
on which alone depend all the hopes we can entertain of ever
discharging or moderating our incumbrances. And therefore the prudent
application of the large sums, now arising from this fund, is a point
of the utmost importance, and well worthy the serious attention of
parliament; which has thereby been enabled, in this present year 1765,
to reduce above two millions sterling of the public debt.

BUT, before any part of the aggregate fund (the surplusses whereof are
one of the chief ingredients that form the sinking fund) can be
applied to diminish the principal of the public debt, it stands
mortgaged by parliament to raise an annual sum for the maintenance of
the king's houshold and the civil list. For this purpose, in the late
reigns, the produce of certain branches of the excise and customs, the
post-office, the duty on wine licences, the revenues of the remaining
crown lands, the profits arising from courts of justice, (which
articles include all the hereditary revenues of the crown) and also a
clear annuity of 120000_l._ in money, were settled on the king for
life, for the support of his majesty's houshold, and the honour and
dignity of the crown. And, as the amount of these several branches
was uncertain, (though in the last reign they were generally computed
to raise almost a million) if they did not arise annually to
800,000_l._ the parliament engaged to make up the deficiency. But his
present majesty having, soon after his accession, spontaneously
signified his consent, that his own hereditary revenues might be so
disposed of as might best conduce to the utility and satisfaction of
the public, and having graciously accepted the limited sum of
800000_l._ _per annum_ for the support of his civil list (and that
also charged with three life annuities, to the princess of Wales, the
duke of Cumberland, and the princess Amalie, to the amount of
77000_l._) the said hereditary and other revenues are now carried into
and made a part of the aggregate fund, and the aggregate fund is
charged with the payment of the whole annuity to the crown of
800000_l._ _per annum_[f]. Hereby the revenues themselves, being put
under the same care and management as the other branches of the public
patrimony, will produce more and be better collected than heretofore;
and the public is a gainer of upwards of 100000_l._ _per annum_ by
this disinterested bounty of his majesty. The civil list, thus
liquidated, together with the four millions and three quarters,
interest of the national debt, and the two millions and a quarter
produced from the sinking fund, make up the seven millions and three
quarters _per annum_, neat money, which were before stated to be the
annual produce of our _perpetual_ taxes; besides the immense, though
uncertain, sums arising from the _annual_ taxes on land and malt, but
which, at an average, may be calculated at more than two millions and
a quarter; and, added to the preceding sum, make the clear produce of
the taxes, exclusive of the charge of collecting, which are raised
yearly on the people of this country, and returned into the king's
exchequer, amount to upwards of ten millions sterling.

[Footnote f: Stat. 1 Geo. III. c. 1.]

THE expences defrayed by the civil list are those that in any shape
relate to civil government; as, the expenses of the houshold; all
salaries to officers of state, to the judges, and every of the king's
servants; the appointments to foreign embassadors; the maintenance of
the royal family; the king's private expenses, or privy purse; and
other very numerous outgoings, as secret service money, pensions, and
other bounties: which sometimes have so far exceeded the revenues
appointed for that purpose, that application has been made to
parliament to discharge the debts contracted on the civil list; as
particularly in 1724, when one million was granted for that purpose by
the statute 11 Geo. I. c. 17.

THE civil list is indeed properly the whole of the king's revenue in
his own distinct capacity; the rest being rather the revenue of the
public, or it's creditors, though collected, and distributed again, in
the name and by the officers of the crown: it now standing in the same
place, as the hereditary income did formerly; and, as that has
gradually diminished, the parliamentary appointments have encreased.
The whole revenue of queen Elizabeth did not amount to more than
600000_l._ a year[g]: that of king Charles I was[h] 800000_l._ and the
revenue voted for king Charles II was[i] 1200000_l._ though it never
in fact amounted to quite so much[k]. But it must be observed, that
under these sums were included all manner of public expenses, among
which lord Clarendon in his speech to the parliament computed that the
charge of the navy and land forces amounted annually to 800000_l._
which was ten times more than before the former troubles[l]. The same
revenue, subject to the same charges, was settled on on [Transcriber's
Note: duplicate word] king James II[m]: but by the encrease of trade,
and more frugal management, it amounted on an average to a million and
half _per annum_, (besides other additional customs, granted by
parliament[n], which produced an annual revenue of 400000_l._) out of
which his fleet and army were maintained at the yearly expense of[o]
1100000_l._ After the revolution, when the parliament took into it's
own hands the annual support of the forces, both maritime and
military, a civil list revenue was settled on the new king and queen,
amounting, with the hereditary duties, to 700000_l._ _per annum_[p];
and the same was continued to queen Anne and king George I[q]. That of
king George II, we have seen, was nominally augmented to[r] 800000_l._
and in fact was considerably more. But that of his present majesty is
expressly limited to that sum; and, by reason of the charges upon it,
amounts at present to little more than 700000_l._ And upon the whole
it is doubtless much better for the crown, and also for the people, to
have the revenue settled upon the modern footing rather than the
antient. For the crown; because it is more certain, and collected with
greater ease: for the people; because they are now delivered from the
feodal hardships, and other odious branches of the prerogative. And
though complaints have sometimes been made of the encrease of the
civil list, yet if we consider the sums that have been formerly
granted, the limited extent under which it is now established, the
revenues and prerogatives given up in lieu of it by the crown, and
(above all) the diminution of the value of money compared with what it
was worth in the last century, we must acknowlege these complaints to
be void of any rational foundation; and that it is impossible to
support that dignity, which a king of Great Britain should maintain,
with an income in any degree less than what is now established by
parliament.

[Footnote g: Lord Clar. continuation. 163.]

[Footnote h: Com. Journ. 4 Sept. 1660.]

[Footnote i: _Ibid._]

[Footnote k: _Ibid._ 4 Jun. 1663. Lord Clar. _ibid._]

[Footnote l: _Ibid._ 165.]

[Footnote m: Stat. 1 Jac. II. c. 1.]

[Footnote n: Stat. 1 Jac. II. c. 3 & 4.]

[Footnote o: Com. Journ. 1 Mar. 20 Mar. 1688.]

[Footnote p: _Ibid._ 14 Mar. 1701.]

[Footnote q: _Ibid._ 17 Mar. 1701. 11 Aug. 1714.]

[Footnote r: Stat. 1 Geo. II. c. 1.]

THIS finishes our enquiries into the fiscal prerogatives of the king;
or his revenue, both ordinary and extraordinary. We have therefore now
chalked out all the principal outlines of this vast title of the law,
the supreme executive magistrate, or the king's majesty, considered in
his several capacities and points of view. But, before we intirely
dismiss this subject, it may not be improper to take a short
comparative review of the power of the executive magistrate, or
prerogative of the crown, as it stood in former days, and as it stands
at present. And we cannot but observe, that most of the laws for
ascertaining, limiting, and restraining this prerogative have been
made within the compass of little more than a century past; from the
petition of right in 3 Car. I. to the present time. So that the powers
of the crown are now to all appearance greatly curtailed and
diminished since the reign of king James the first: particularly, by
the abolition of the star chamber and high commission courts in the
reign of Charles the first, and by the disclaiming of martial law, and
the power of levying taxes on the subject, by the same prince: by the
disuse of forest laws for a century past: and by the many excellent
provisions enacted under Charles the second; especially, the abolition
of military tenures, purveyance, and preemption; the _habeas corpus_
act; and the act to prevent the discontinuance of parliaments for
above three years: and, since the revolution, by the strong and
emphatical words in which our liberties are asserted in the bill of
rights, and act of settlement; by the act for triennial, since turned
into septennial, elections; by the exclusion of certain officers from
the house of commons; by rendering the seats of the judges permanent,
and their salaries independent; and by restraining the king's pardon
from operating on parliamentary impeachments. Besides all this, if we
consider how the crown is impoverished and stripped of all it's
antient revenues, so that it greatly depends on the liberality of
parliament for it's necessary support and maintenance, we may perhaps
be led to think, that the ballance is enclined pretty strongly to the
popular scale, and that the executive magistrate has neither
independence nor power enough left, to form that check upon the lords
and commons, which the founders of our constitution intended.

BUT, on the other hand, it is to be considered, that every prince, in
the first parliament after his accession, has by long usage a truly
royal addition to his hereditary revenue settled upon him for his
life; and has never any occasion to apply to parliament for supplies,
but upon some public necessity of the whole realm. This restores to
him that constitutional independence, which at his first accession
seems, it must be owned, to be wanting. And then, with regard to
power, we may find perhaps that the hands of government are at least
sufficiently strengthened; and that an English monarch is now in no
danger of being overborne by either the nobility or the people. The
instruments of power are not perhaps so open and avowed as they
formerly were, and therefore are the less liable to jealous and
invidious reflections; but they are not the weaker upon that account.
In short, our national debt and taxes (besides the inconveniences
before-mentioned) have also in their natural consequences thrown such
a weight of power into the executive scale of government, as we cannot
think was intended by our patriot ancestors; who gloriously struggled
for the abolition of the then formidable parts of the prerogative; and
by an unaccountable want of foresight established this system in their
stead. The entire collection and management of so vast a revenue,
being placed in the hands of the crown, have given rise to such a
multitude of new officers, created by and removeable at the royal
pleasure, that they have extended the influence of government to every
corner of the nation. Witness the commissioners, and the multitude of
dependents on the customs, in every port of the kingdom; the
commissioners of excise, and their numerous subalterns, in every
inland district; the postmasters, and their servants, planted in every
town, and upon every public road; the commissioners of the stamps, and
their distributors, which are full as scattered and full as numerous;
the officers of the salt duty, which, though a species of excise and
conducted in the same manner, are yet made a distinct corps from the
ordinary managers of that revenue; the surveyors of houses and
windows; the receivers of the land tax; the managers of lotteries; and
the commissioners of hackney coaches; all which are either mediately
or immediately appointed by the crown, and removeable at pleasure
without any reason assigned: these, it requires but little penetration
to see, must give that power, on which they depend for subsistence, an
influence most amazingly extensive. To this may be added the frequent
opportunities of conferring particular obligations, by preference in
loans, subscriptions, tickets, remittances, and other money-transactions,
which will greatly encrease this influence; and that over those
persons whose attachment, on account of their wealth, is frequently
the most desirable. All this is the natural, though perhaps the
unforeseen, consequence of erecting our funds of credit, and to
support them establishing our present perpetual taxes: the whole of
which is entirely new since the restoration in 1660; and by far the
greatest part since the revolution in 1688. And the same may be said
with regard to the officers in our numerous army, and the places which
the army has created. All which put together gives the executive power
so persuasive an energy with respect to the persons themselves, and so
prevailing an interest with their friends and families, as will amply
make amends for the loss of external prerogative.

BUT, though this profusion of offices should have no effect on
individuals, there is still another newly acquired branch of power;
and that is, not the influence only, but the force of a disciplined
army: paid indeed ultimately by the people, but immediately by the
crown; raised by the crown, officered by the crown, commanded by the
crown. They are kept on foot it is true only from year to year, and
that by the power of parliament: but during that year they must, by
the nature of our constitution, if raised at all, be at the absolute
disposal of the crown. And there need but few words to demonstrate how
great a trust is thereby reposed in the prince by his people. A trust,
that is more than equivalent to a thousand little troublesome
prerogatives.

ADD to all this, that, besides the civil list, the immense revenue of
seven millions sterling, which is annually paid to the creditors of
the publick, or carried to the sinking fund, is first deposited in the
royal exchequer, and thence issued out to the respective offices of
payment. This revenue the people can never refuse to raise, because it
is made perpetual by act of parliament: which also, when well
considered, will appear to be a trust of great delicacy and high
importance.

UPON the whole therefore I think it is clear, that, whatever may have
become of the _nominal_, the _real_ power of the crown has not been
too far weakened by any transactions in the last century. Much is
indeed given up; but much is also acquired. The stern commands of
prerogative have yielded to the milder voice of influence; the slavish
and exploded doctrine of non-resistance has given way to a military
establishment by law; and to the disuse of parliaments has succeeded a
parliamentary trust of an immense perpetual revenue. When, indeed, by
the free operation of the sinking fund, our national debts shall be
lessened; when the posture of foreign affairs, and the universal
introduction of a well planned and national militia, will suffer our
formidable army to be thinned and regulated; and when (in consequence
of all) our taxes shall be gradually reduced; this adventitious power
of the crown will slowly and imperceptibly diminish, as it slowly and
imperceptibly rose. But, till that shall happen, it will be our
especial duty, as good subjects and good Englishmen, to reverence the
crown, and yet guard against corrupt and servile influence from those
who are intrusted with it's authority; to be loyal, yet free;
obedient, and yet independent: and, above every thing, to hope that we
may long, very long, continue to be governed by a sovereign, who, in
all those public acts that have personally proceeded from himself,
hath manifested the highest veneration for the free constitution of
Britain; hath already in more than one instance remarkably
strengthened it's outworks; and will therefore never harbour a
thought, or adopt a persuasion, in any the remotest degree detrimental
to public liberty.




CHAPTER THE NINTH.

OF SUBORDINATE MAGISTRATES.


IN a former chapter of these commentaries[a] we distinguished
magistrates into two kinds; supreme, or those in whom the sovereign
power of the state resides; and subordinate, or those who act in an
inferior secondary sphere. We have hitherto considered the former kind
only, namely, the supreme legislative power or parliament, and the
supreme executive power, which is the king: and are now to proceed to
enquire into the rights and duties of the principal subordinate
magistrates.

[Footnote a: ch. 2. pag. 142.]

AND herein we are not to investigate the powers and duties of his
majesty's great officers of state, the lord treasurer, lord
chamberlain, the principal secretaries, or the like; because I do not
know that they are in that capacity in any considerable degree the
objects of our laws, or have any very important share of magistracy
conferred upon them: except that the secretaries of state are allowed
the power of commitment, in order to bring offenders to trial[b].
Neither shall I here treat of the office and authority of the lord
chancellor, or the other judges of the superior courts of justice;
because they will find a more proper place in the third part of these
commentaries. Nor shall I enter into any minute disquisitions, with
regard to the rights and dignities of mayors and aldermen, or other
magistrates of particular corporations; because these are mere private
and strictly municipal rights, depending entirely upon the domestic
constitution of their respective franchises. But the magistrates and
officers, whose rights and duties it will be proper in this chapter to
consider, are such as are generally in use and have a jurisdiction and
authority dispersedly throughout the kingdom: which are, principally,
sheriffs; coroners; justices of the peace; constables; surveyors of
highways; and overseers of the poor. In treating of all which I shall
enquire into, first, their antiquity and original; next, the manner in
which they are appointed and may be removed; and, lastly, their rights
and duties. And first of sheriffs.

[Footnote b: 1 Leon. 70. 2 Leon. 175. Comb. 343. 5 Mod. 84. Salk.
347.]

I. THE sheriff is an officer of very great antiquity in this kingdom,
his name being derived from two Saxon words, shire reeve, the bailiff
or officer of the shire. He is called in Latin _vice-comes_, as being
the deputy of the earl or _comes_; to whom the custody of the shire is
said to have been committed at the first division of this kingdom into
counties. But the earls in process of time, by reason of their high
employments and attendance on the king's person, not being able to
transact the business of the county, were delivered of that burden[c];
reserving to themselves the honour, but the labour was laid on the
sheriff. So that now the sheriff does all the king's business in the
county; and though he be still called _vice-comes_, yet he is entirely
independent of, and not subject to the earl; the king by his letters
patent committing _custodiam comitatus_ to the sheriff, and him alone.

[Footnote c: Dalton of sheriffs, c. 1.]

SHERIFFS were formerly chosen by the inhabitants of the several
counties. In confirmation of which it was ordained by statute 28 Edw.
I. c. 8. that the people should have election of sheriffs in every
shire, where the shrievalty is not of inheritance. For antiently in
some counties, particularly on the borders, the sheriffs were
hereditary; as I apprehend they are in Scotland, and in the county of
Westmorland, to this day: and the city of London has also the
inheritance of the shrievalty of Middlesex vested in their body by
charter[d]. The reason of these popular elections is assigned in the
same statute, c. 13. "that the commons might chuse such as would not
be a burthen to them." And herein appears plainly a strong trace of
the democratical part of our constitution; in which form of government
it is an indispensable requisite, that the people should chuse their
own magistrates[e]. This election was in all probability not
absolutely vested in the commons, but required the royal approbation.
For in the Gothic constitution, the judges of their county courts
(which office is executed by our sheriff) were elected by the people,
but confirmed by the king: and the form of their election was thus
managed; the people, or _incolae territorii_, chose _twelve_ electors,
and they nominated _three_ persons, _ex quibus rex unum
confirmabat_[f]. But, with us in England, these popular elections,
growing tumultuous, were put an end to by the statute 9 Edw. II. st.
2. which enacted, that the sheriffs should from thenceforth be
assigned by the lord chancellor, treasurer, and the judges; as being
persons in whom the same trust might with confidence be reposed. By
statutes 14 Edw. III. c. 7. and 23 Hen. VI. c. 8. the chancellor,
treasurer, _chief_ justices, and _chief_ baron, are to make this
election; and that on the morrow of All Souls in the exchequer. But
the custom now is (and has been at least ever since the time of
Fortescue[g], who was chief justice and chancellor to Henry the sixth)
that _all_ the judges, and certain other great officers, meet in the
exchequer chamber on the morrow of All Souls yearly, (which day is now
altered to the morrow of St. Martin by the act for abbreviating
Michaelmas term) and then and there nominate three persons to the
king, who afterwards appoints one of them to be sheriff. This custom,
of the _twelve_ judges nominating _three_ persons, seems borrowed from
the Gothic constitution beforementioned; with this difference, that
among the Goths the twelve nominors were first elected by the people
themselves. And this usage of ours at it's first introduction, I am
apt to believe, was founded upon some statute, though not now to be
found among our printed laws: first, because it is materially
different from the directions of all the statutes beforementioned;
which it is hard to conceive that the judges would have countenanced
by their concurrence, or that Fortescue would have inserted in his
book, unless by the authority of some statute: and also, because a
statute is expressly referred to in the record, which sir Edward Coke
tells us[h] he transcribed from the council book of 3 Mar. 34 Hen. VI.
and which is in substance as follows. The king had of his own
authority appointed a man sheriff of Lincolnshire, which office he
refused to take upon him: whereupon the opinions of the judges were
taken, what should be done in this behalf. And the two chief justices,
sir John Fortescue and sir John Prisot, delivered the unanimous
opinion of them all; "that the king did an error when he made a person
sheriff, that was not chosen and presented to him according to the
_statute_; that the person refusing was liable to no fine for
disobedience, as if he had been one of the _three_ persons chosen
according to the tenor of the _statute_; that they would advise the
king to have recourse to the _three_ persons that were chosen
according to the _statute_, or that some other thrifty man be
intreated to occupy the office for this year; and that, the next year,
to eschew such inconveniences, the order of the _statute_ in this
behalf made be observed." But, notwithstanding this unanimous
resolution of all the judges of England, thus entered in the council
book, some of our writers[i] have affirmed, that the king, by his
prerogative, may name whom he pleases to be sheriff, whether chosen by
the judges or no. This is grounded on a very particular case in the
fifth year of queen Elizabeth, when, by reason of the plague, there
was no Michaelmas term kept at Westminster; so that the judges could
not meet there _in crastino Animarum_ to nominate the sheriffs:
whereupon the queen named them herself, without such previous
assembly, appointing for the most part one of the two remaining in the
last year's list[k]. And this case, thus circumstanced, is the only
precedent in our books for the making these extraordinary sheriffs. It
is true, the reporter adds, that it was held that the queen by her
prerogative might make a sheriff without the election of the judges,
_non obstante aliquo statuto in contrarium_: but the doctrine of _non
obstante_'s, which sets the prerogative above the laws, was
effectually demolished by the bill of rights at the revolution, and
abdicated Westminster-hall when king James abdicated the kingdom. So
that sheriffs cannot now be legally appointed, otherwise than
according to the known and established law.

[Footnote d: 3 Rep. 72.]

[Footnote e: Montesq. Sp. L. b. 2. c. 2.]

[Footnote f: Stiernhook _de jure Goth._ _l._ 1. _c._ 3.]

[Footnote g: _de L.L._ _c._ 24.]

[Footnote h: 2 Inst. 559.]

[Footnote i: Jenkins. 229.]

[Footnote k: Dyer 225.]

SHERIFFS, by virtue of several old statutes, are to continue in their
office no longer than one year; and yet it hath been said[l] that a
sheriff may be appointed _durante bene placito_, or during the king's
pleasure; and so is the form of the royal writ[m]. Therefore, till a
new sheriff be named, his office cannot be determined, unless by his
own death, or the demise of the king; in which last case it was usual
for the successor to send a new writ to the old sheriff[n]: but now by
statute 1 Ann. st. 1. c. 8. all officers appointed by the preceding
king may hold their offices for six months after the king's demise,
unless sooner displaced by the successor. We may farther observe, that
by statute 1 Ric. II. c. 11. no man, that has served the office of
sheriff for one year, can be compelled to serve the same again within
three years after.

[Footnote l: 4 Rep. 32.]

[Footnote m: Dalt. of sheriffs. 8.]

[Footnote n: Dalt. 7.]

WE shall find it is of the utmost importance to have the sheriff
appointed according to law, when we consider his power and duty. These
are either as a judge, as the keeper of the king's peace, as a
ministerial officer of the superior courts of justice, or as the
king's bailiff.

IN his judicial capacity he is to hear and determine all causes of
forty shillings value and under, in his county court, of which more in
it's proper place: and he has also judicial power in divers other
civil cases[o]. He is likewise to decide the elections of knights of
the shire, (subject to the control of the house of commons) of
coroners, and of verderors; to judge of the qualification of voters,
and to return such as he shall determine to be duly elected.

[Footnote o: Dalt. c. 4.]

AS the keeper of the king's peace, both by common law and special
commission, he is the first man in the county, and superior in rank to
any nobleman therein, during his office[p]. He may apprehend, and
commit to prison, all persons who break the peace, or attempt to break
it: and may bind any one in a recognizance to keep the king's peace.
He may, and is bound _ex officio_ to, pursue and take all traitors,
murderers, felons, and other misdoers, and commit them to gaol for
safe custody. He is also to defend his county against any of the
king's enemies when they come into the land: and for this purpose, as
well as for keeping the peace and pursuing felons, he may command all
the people of his county to attend him; which is called the _posse
comitatus_, or power of the county[q]: which summons every person
above fifteen years old, and under the degree of a peer, is bound to
attend upon warning[r], under pain of fine and imprisonment[s]. But
though the sheriff is thus the principal conservator of the peace in
his county, yet, by the express directions of the great charter[t],
he, together with the constable, coroner, and certain other officers
of the king, are forbidden to hold any pleas of the crown, or, in
other words, to try any criminal offence. For it would be highly
unbecoming, that the executioners of justice should be also the
judges; should impose, as well as levy, fines and amercements; should
one day condemn a man to death, and personally execute him the next.
Neither may he act as an ordinary justice of the peace during the time
of his office[u]: for this would be equally inconsistent; he being in
many respects the servant of the justices.

[Footnote p: 1 Roll. Rep. 237.]

[Footnote q: Dalt. c. 95.]

[Footnote r: Lamb. Eiren. 315.]

[Footnote s: Stat. 2 Hen. V. c. 8.]

[Footnote t: _cap._ 17.]

[Footnote u: Stat. 1 Mar. st. 2. c. 8.]

IN his ministerial capacity the sheriff is bound to execute all
process issuing from the king's courts of justice. In the commencement
of civil causes, he is to serve the writ, to arrest, and to take bail;
when the cause comes to trial, he must summon and return the jury;
when it is determined, he must see the judgment of the court carried
into execution. In criminal matters, he also arrests and imprisons, he
returns the jury, he has the custody of the delinquent, and he
executes the sentence of the court, though it extend to death itself.

AS the king's bailiff, it is his business to preserve the rights of
the king within his bailiwick; for so his county is frequently called
in the writs: a word introduced by the princes of the Norman line; in
imitation of the French, whose territory is divided into bailiwicks,
as that of England into counties[w]. He must seise to the king's use
all lands devolved to the crown by attainder or escheat; must levy all
fines and forfeitures; must seise and keep all waifs, wrecks, estrays,
and the like, unless they be granted to some subject; and must also
collect the king's rents within his bailiwick, if commanded by process
from the exchequer[x].

[Footnote w: Fortesc. _de L.L._ c. 24.]

[Footnote x: Dalt. c. 9.]

TO execute these various offices, the sheriff has under him many
inferior officers; an under-sheriff, bailiffs, and gaolers; who must
neither buy, sell, nor farm their offices, on forfeiture of 500_l._[y]

[Footnote y: Stat. 3 Geo. I. c. 15.]

THE under-sheriff usually performs all the duties of the office; a
very few only excepted, where the personal presence of the
high-sheriff is necessary. But no under-sheriff shall abide in his
office above one year[z]; and if he does, by statute 23 Hen. VI. c. 8.
he forfeits 200_l._ a very large penalty in those early days. And no
under-sheriff or sheriff's officer shall practice as an attorney,
during the time he continues in such office[a]: for this would be a
great inlet to partiality and oppression. But these salutary
regulations are shamefully evaded, by practising in the names of other
attorneys, and putting in sham deputies by way of nominal
under-sheriffs: by reason of which, says Dalton[b], the under-sheriffs
and bailiffs do grow so cunning in their several places, that they are
able to deceive, and it may be well feared that many of them do
deceive, both the king, the high-sheriff, and the county.

[Footnote z: Stat. 42 Edw. III. c. 9.]

[Footnote a: Stat. 1 Hen. V. c. 4.]

[Footnote b: of sheriffs, c. 115.]

BAILIFFS, or sheriff's officers, are either bailiffs of hundreds, or
special bailiffs. Bailiffs of hundreds are officers appointed over
those respective districts by the sheriffs, to collect fines therein;
to summon juries; to attend the judges and justices at the assises,
and quarter sessions; and also to execute writs and process in the
several hundreds. But, as these are generally plain men, and not
thoroughly skilful in this latter part of their office, that of
serving writs, and making arrests and executions, it is now usual to
join special bailiffs with them; who are generally mean persons
employed by the sheriffs on account only of their adroitness and
dexterity in hunting and seising their prey. The sheriff being
answerable for the misdemesnors of these bailiffs, they are therefore
usually bound in a bond for the due execution of their office, and
thence are called bound-bailiffs; which the common people have
corrupted into a much more homely appellation.

GAOLERS are also the servants of the sheriff, and he must be
responsible for their conduct. Their business is to keep safely all
such persons as are committed to them by lawful warrant: and, if they
suffer any such to escape, the sheriff shall answer it to the king, if
it be a criminal matter; or, in a civil case, to the party injured[c].
And to this end the sheriff must[d] have lands sufficient within the
county to answer the king and his people. The abuses of goalers and
sheriff's officers toward the unfortunate persons in their custody are
well restrained and guarded against by statute 32 Geo. II. c. 28.

[Footnote c: Dalt. c. 118. 4 Rep. 34.]

[Footnote d: Stat. 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 21.]

THE vast expense, which custom had introduced in serving the office of
high-sheriff, was grown such a burthen to the subject, that it was
enacted, by statute 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 21. that no sheriff should
keep any table at the assises, except for his own family, or give any
presents to the judges or their servants, or have more than forty men
in livery; yet, for the sake of safety and decency, he may not have
less than twenty men in England and twelve in Wales; upon forfeiture,
in any of these cases, of 200_l._

II. THE coroner's is also a very antient office at the common law. He
is called coroner, _coronator_, because he hath principally to do with
pleas of the crown, or such wherein the king is more immediately
concerned[e]. And in this light the lord chief justice of the king's
bench is the principal coroner in the kingdom, and may (if he pleases)
exercise the jurisdiction of a coroner in any part of the realm[f].
But there are also particular coroners for every county of England;
usually four, but sometimes six, and sometimes fewer[g]. This
officer[h] is of equal antiquity with the sheriff; and was ordained
together with him to keep the peace, when the earls gave up the
wardship of the county.

[Footnote e: 2 Inst. 31. 4 Inst. 271.]

[Footnote f: 4 Rep. 57.]

[Footnote g: F.N.B. 163.]

[Footnote h: Mirror, c. 1. §. 3.]

HE is still chosen by all the freeholders in the county court, as by
the policy of our antient laws the sheriffs, and conservators of the
peace, and all other officers were, who were concerned in matters that
affected the liberty of the people[i]; and as verderors of the forests
still are, whose business it is to stand between the prerogative and
the subject in the execution of the forest laws. For this purpose
there is a writ at common law _de coronatore eligendo_[k]: in which
it is expressly commanded the sheriff, "_quod talem eligi faciat, qui
melius et sciat, et velit, et possit, officio illi intendere_." And,
in order to effect this the more surely, it was enacted by the statute
of Westm. I[l], that none but lawful and discreet knights should be
chosen. But it seems it is now sufficient if a man have lands enough
to be made a knight, whether he be really knighted or not[m]: and
there was an instance in the 5 Edw. III. of a man being removed from
this office, because he was only a merchant[n]. The coroner ought also
to have estate sufficient to maintain the dignity of his office, and
answer any fines that may be set upon him for his misbehaviour[o]: and
if he have not enough to answer, his fine shall be levyed on the
county, as a punishment for electing an insufficient officer[p]. Now
indeed, through the culpable neglect of gentlemen of property, this
office has been suffered to fall into disrepute, and get into low and
indigent hands: so that, although formerly no coroner would condescend
to be paid for serving his country, and they were by the aforesaid
statute of Westm. I. expressly forbidden to take a reward, under pain
of great forfeiture to the king; yet for many years past they have
only desired to be chosen for the sake of their perquisites; being
allowed fees for their attendance by the statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1.
which sir Edward Coke complains of heavily[q]; though they have since
his time been much enlarged[r].

[Footnote i: 2 Inst. 558.]

[Footnote k: F.N.B. 163.]

[Footnote l: 3 Edw. I. c. 10.]

[Footnote m: F.N.B. 163, 164.]

[Footnote n: 2 Inst. 32.]

[Footnote o: F.N.B. 163, 164.]

[Footnote p: Mirr. c. 1. §. 3. 2 Inst. 175.]

[Footnote q: 2 Inst. 210.]

[Footnote r: Stat. 25 Geo. II. c. 29.]

THE coroner is chosen for life: but may be removed, either by being
made sheriff, or chosen verderor, which are offices incompatible with
the other; or by the king's writ _de coronatore exonerando_, for a
cause to be therein assigned, as that he is engaged in other business,
is incapacitated by years or sickness, hath not a sufficient estate in
the county, or lives in an inconvenient part of it[s]. And by the
statute 25 Geo. II. c. 29. extortion, neglect, or misbehaviour, are
also made causes of removal.

[Footnote s: F.N.B. 163, 164.]

THE office and power of a coroner are also, like those of a sheriff,
either judicial or ministerial; but principally judicial. This is in
great measure ascertained by statute 4 Edw. I. _de officio
coronatoris_; and consists, first, in enquiring (when any person is
slain or dies suddenly) concerning the manner of his death. And this
must be "_super visum corporis_[t];" for, if the body be not found,
the coroner cannot sit[u]. He must also sit at the very place where
the death happened; and his enquiry is made by a jury from four, five,
or six of the neighbouring towns, over whom he is to preside. If any
be found guilty by this inquest of murder, he is to commit to prison
for further trial, and is also to enquire concerning their lands,
goods and chattels, which are forfeited thereby: but, whether it be
murder or not, he must enquire whether any deodand has accrued to the
king, or the lord of the franchise, by this death: and must certify
the whole of this inquisition to the court of king's bench, or the
next assises. Another branch of his office is to enquire concerning
shipwrecks; and certify whether wreck or not, and who is in possession
of the goods. Concerning treasure trove, he is also to enquire who
were the finders, and where it is, and whether any one be suspected of
having found and concealed a treasure; "and that may be well perceived
(saith the old statute of Edw. I.) where one liveth riotously,
haunting taverns, and hath done so of long time:" whereupon he might
be attached, and held to bail, upon this suspicion only.

[Footnote t: 4 Inst. 271.]

[Footnote u: Thus, in the Gothic constitution, before any fine was
payable by the neighbourhood, for the slaughter of a man therein, "_de
corpore delicti constare oportebat; i.e. non tam fuisse aliquem in
territorio isto mortuum inventum, quam vulneratum et caesum. Potest
enim homo etiam ex alia causa subito mori_." Stiernhook _de jure
Gothor._ _l._ 3. _c._ 4.]

THE ministerial office of the coroner is only as the sheriff's
substitute. For when just exception can be taken to the sheriff, for
suspicion of partiality, (as that he is interested in the suit, or of
kindred to either plaintiff or defendant) the process must then be
awarded to the coroner, instead of the sheriff, for execution of the
king's writs[w].

[Footnote w: 4 Inst. 271.]

III. THE next species of subordinate magistrates, whom I am to
consider, are justices of the peace; the principal of whom is the
_custos rotulorum_, or keeper of the records of the county. The common
law hath ever had a special care and regard for the conservation of
the peace; for peace is the very end and foundation of civil society.
And therefore, before the present constitution of justices was
invented, there were peculiar officers appointed by the common law for
the maintenance of the public peace. Of these some had, and still
have, this power annexed to other offices which they hold; others had
it merely by itself, and were thence named _custodes_ or
_conservatores pacis_. Those that were so _virtute officii_ still
continue; but the latter sort are superseded by the modern justices.

THE kings majesty[x] is, by his office and dignity royal, the
principal conservator of the peace within all his dominions; and may
give authority to any other to see the peace kept, and to punish such
as break it: hence it is usually called the king's peace. The lord
chancellor or keeper, the lord treasurer, the lord high steward of
England, the lord mareschal, and lord high constable of England (when
any such officers are in being) and all the justices of the court of
king's bench (by virtue of their offices) and the master of the rolls
(by prescription) are general conservators of the peace throughout the
whole kingdom, and may commit all breakers of it, or bind them in
recognizances to keep it[y]: the other judges are only so in their own
courts. The coroner is also a conservator of the peace within his own
county[z]; as is also the sheriff[a]; and both of them may take a
recognizance or security for the peace. Constables, tythingmen, and
the like, are also conservators of the peace within their own
jurisdictions; and may apprehend all breakers of the peace, and commit
them till they find sureties for their keeping it[b].

[Footnote x: Lambard. Eirenarch. 12.]

[Footnote y: Lamb. 12.]

[Footnote z: Britton. 3.]

[Footnote a: F.N.B. 81.]

[Footnote b: Lamb. 14.]

THOSE that were, without any office, simply and merely conservators of
the peace, were chosen by the freeholders in full county court before
the sheriff; the writ for their election directing them to be chosen
"_de probioribus et melioribus in comitatu suo in custodes pacis_[c]."
But when queen Isabel, the wife of Edward II, had contrived to depose
her husband by a forced resignation of the crown, and had set up his
son Edward III in his place; this, being a thing then without example
in England, it was feared would much alarm the people; especially as
the old king was living, though hurried about from castle to castle;
till at last he met with an untimely death. To prevent therefore any
risings, or other disturbance of the peace, the new king sent writs to
all the sheriffs in England, the form of which is preserved by Thomas
Walsingham[d], giving a plausible account of the manner of his
obtaining the crown; to wit, that it was done _ipsius patris
beneplacito_: and withal commanding each sheriff that the peace be
kept throughout his bailiwick, on pain and peril of disinheritance and
loss of life and limb. And in a few weeks after the date of these
writs, it was ordained in parliament[e], that, for the better
maintaining and keeping of the peace in every county, good men and
lawful, which were no maintainers of evil, or barretors in the
country, should be _assigned_ to keep the peace. And in this manner,
and upon this occasion, was the election of the conservators of the
peace taken from the people, and given to the king[f]; this assignment
being construed to be by the king's commission[g]. But still they were
called only conservators, wardens, or keepers of the peace, till the
statute 34 Edw. III. c. 1. gave them the power of trying felonies; and
then they acquired the more honorable appellation of justices[h].

[Footnote c: Lamb. 16.]

[Footnote d: Hist. _A.D._ 1327.]

[Footnote e: Stat. 1 Edw. III. c. 16.]

[Footnote f: Lamb. 20.]

[Footnote g: Stat. 4 Edw. III. c. 2. and 18 Edw. III. st. 2. c. 2.]

[Footnote h: Lamb. 23.]

THESE justices are appointed by the king's special commission under
the great seal, the form of which was settled by all the judges,
_A.D._ 1590[i]. This appoints them all[k], jointly and severally, to
keep the peace, and any two or more of them to enquire of and
determine felonies, and other misdemesnors: in which number some
particular justices, or one of them, are directed to be always
included, and no business to be done without their presence; the words
of the commission running thus, "_quorum aliquem vestrum, A. B. C. D.
&c. unum esse volumus_;" whence the persons so named are usually
called justices of the _quorum_. And formerly it was customary to
appoint only a select number of justices, eminent for their skill and
discretion, to be of the _quorum_; but now the practice is to advance
almost all of them to that dignity, naming them all over again in the
_quorum_ clause, except perhaps only some one inconsiderable person
for the sake of propriety: and no exception is now allowable, for not
expressing in the form of warrants, &c, that the justice who issued
them is of the _quorum_[l].

[Footnote i: Lamb. 43.]

[Footnote k: See the form itself, Lamb. 35. Burn. tit. justices, §.
1.]

[Footnote l: Stat. 26 Geo. II. c. 27.]

TOUCHING the number and qualifications of these justices; it was
ordained by statute 18 Edw. III. c. 2. that _two_, or _three_, of the
best reputation in each county shall be assigned to be keepers of the
peace. But these being found rather too few for that purpose, it was
provided by statute 34 Edw. III. c. 1. that one lord, and three, or
four, of the most worthy men in the county, with some learned in the
law, shall be made justices in every county. But afterwards the number
of justices, through the ambition of private persons, became so large,
that it was thought necessary by statute 12 Ric. II. c. 10. and 14 Ric
II. c. 11. to restrain them at first to six, and afterwards to eight
only. But this rule is now disregarded, and the cause seems to be (as
Lambard observed long ago[m]) that the growing number of statute
laws, committed from time to time to the charge of justices of the
peace, have occasioned also (and very reasonably) their encrease to a
larger number. And, as to their qualifications, the statutes just
cited direct them to be of the best reputation, and most worthy men in
the county: and the statute 13 Ric. II. c. 10. orders them to be of
the most sufficient knights, esquires, and gentlemen of the law. Also
by statute 2 Hen. V. st. 1. c. 4. and st. 2. c. 1. they must be
resident in their several counties. And because, contrary to these
statutes, men of small substance had crept into the commission, whose
poverty made them both covetous and contemptible, it was enacted by
statute 18 Hen. VI. c. 11. that no justice should be put in
commission, if he had not lands to the value of 20_l._ _per annum_.
And, the rate of money being greatly altered since that time, it is
now enacted by statute 5 Geo. II. c. 11. that every justice, except as
is therein excepted, shall have 100_l._ _per annum_ clear of all
deductions; and, if he acts without such qualification, he shall
forfeit 100_l._ which[n] is almost an equivalent to the 20_l._ _per
annum_ required in Henry the sixth's time: and of this qualification[o]
the justice must now make oath. Also it is provided by the act 5 Geo.
II. that no practising attorney, solicitor, or proctor, shall be
capable of acting as a justice of the peace.

[Footnote m: Lamb. 34.]

[Footnote n: See bishop Fleetwood's calculations in his _chronicon
pretiosum_.]

[Footnote o: Stat. 18 Geo. II. c. 20.]

AS the office of these justices is conferred by the king, so it
subsists only during his pleasure; and is determinable, 1. By the
demise of the crown; that is, in six months after[p]. 2. By express
writ under the great seal[q], discharging any particular person, from
being any longer justice. 3. By superseding the commission by writ of
_supersedeas_, which suspends the power of all the justices, but does
not totally destroy it; seeing it may be revived again by another
writ, called a _procedendo_. 4. By a new commission, which virtually,
though silently, discharges all the former justices that are not
included therein; for two commissions cannot subsist at once. 5. By
accession of the office of sheriff or coroner[r]. Formerly it was
thought, that if a man was named in any commission of the peace, and
had afterwards a new dignity conferred upon him, that this determined
his office; he no longer answering the description of the commission:
but now[s] it is provided, that notwithstanding a new title of
dignity, the justice on whom it is conferred shall still continue a
justice.

[Footnote p: Stat. 1 Ann. c. 8.]

[Footnote q: Lamb. 67.]

[Footnote r: Stat. 1 Mar. st. 1. c. 8.]

[Footnote s: Stat. 1 Edw. VI. c. 7.]

THE power, office, and duty of a justice of the peace depend on his
commission, and on the several statutes, which have created objects of
his jurisdiction. His commission, first, empowers him singly to
conserve the peace; and thereby gives him all the power of the antient
conservators at the common law, in suppressing riots and affrays, in
taking securities for the peace, and in apprehending and committing
felons and other inferior criminals. It also empowers any two or more
of them to hear and determine all felonies and other offences; which
is the ground of their jurisdiction at sessions, of which more will be
said in it's proper place. And as to the powers given to one, two, or
more justices by the several statutes, that from time to time have
heaped upon them such an infinite variety of business, that few care
to undertake, and fewer understand, the office; they are such and of
so great importance to the public, that the country is greatly obliged
to any worthy magistrate, that without sinister views of his own will
engage in this troublesome service. And therefore, if a well meaning
justice makes any undesigned slip in his practice, great lenity and
indulgence is shewn to him in the courts of law; and there are many
statutes made to protect him in the upright discharge of his
office[t]: which, among other privileges, prohibit such justices from
being sued for any oversights without notice beforehand; and stop all
suits begun, on tender made of sufficient amends. But, on the other
hand, any malicious or tyrannical abuse of their office is sure to be
severely punished; and all persons who recover a verdict against a
justice, for any wilful or malicious injury, are entitled to double
costs.

[Footnote t: Stat. 7 Jac. I. c. 5. 21 Jac. I. c. 12. 24 Geo. II. c.
44.]

IT is impossible upon our present plan to enter minutely into the
particulars of the accumulated authority, thus committed to the charge
of these magistrates. I must therefore refer myself at present to such
subsequent parts of these commentaries, as will in their turns
comprize almost every object of the justices' jurisdiction: and in the
mean time recommend to the student the perusal of Mr Lambard's
_eirenarcha_, and Dr Burn's _justice of the peace_; wherein he will
find every thing relative to this subject, both in antient and modern
practice, collected with great care and accuracy, and disposed in a
most clear and judicious method.

I SHALL next consider some officers of lower rank than those which
have gone before, and of more confined jurisdiction; but still such as
are universally in use through every part of the kingdom.

IV. FOURTHLY, then, of the constable. The word constable is frequently
said to be derived from the Saxon, koning-staple, and to signify the
support of the king. But, as we borrowed the name as well as the
office of constable from the French, I am rather inclined to deduce
it, with sir H. Spelman and Dr Cowel, from that language, wherein it
is plainly derived from the Latin _comes stabuli_, an officer well
known in the empire; so called because, like the great constable of
France, as well as the lord high constable of England, he was to
regulate all matters of chivalry, tilts, turnaments, and feats of
arms, which were performed on horseback. This great office of lord
high constable hath been disused in England, except only upon great
and solemn occasions, as the king's coronation and the like, ever
since the attainder of Stafford duke of Buckingham under king Henry
VIII; as in France it was suppressed about a century after by an edict
of Louis XIII[u]: but from his office, says Lambard[w], this lower
constableship was at first drawn and fetched, and is as it were a very
finger of that hand. For the statute of Winchester[x], which first
appoints them, directs that, for the better keeping of the peace, two
constables in every hundred and franchise shall inspect all matters
relating to _arms_ and _armour_.

[Footnote u: Philips's life of Pole. ii. 111.]

[Footnote w: of constables, 5.]

[Footnote x: 13 Edw. I. c. 6.]

CONSTABLES are of two sorts, high constables, and petty constables.
The former were first ordained by the statute of Winchester, as
before-mentioned; and are appointed at the court leets of the
franchise or hundred over which they preside, or, in default of that,
by the justices at their quarter sessions; and are removeable by the
same authority that appoints them[y]. The petty constables are
inferior officers in every town and parish, subordinate to the high
constable of the hundred, first instituted about the reign of Edward
III[z]. These petty constables have two offices united in them; the
one antient, the other modern. Their antient office is that of
headborough, tithing-man, or borsholder; of whom we formerly spoke[a],
and who are as antient as the time of king Alfred: their more modern
office is that of constable merely; which was appointed (as was
observed) so lately as the reign of Edward III, in order to assist the
high constable[b]. And in general the antient headboroughs,
tithing-men, and borsholders, were made use of to serve as petty
constables; though not so generally, but that in many places they
still continue distinct officers from the constable. They are all
chosen by the jury at the court leet; or, if no court leet be held,
are appointed by two justices of the peace[c].

[Footnote y: Salk. 150.]

[Footnote z: Spelm. Gloss. 148.]

[Footnote a: pag. 110.]

[Footnote b: Lamb. 9.]

[Footnote c: Stat. 14 & 15 Car. II. c. 12.]

THE general duty of all constables, both high and petty, as well as of
the other officers, is to keep the king's peace in their several
districts; and to that purpose they are armed with very large powers,
of arresting, and imprisoning, of breaking open houses, and the like:
of the extent of which powers, considering what manner of men are for
the most part put upon these offices, it is perhaps very well that
they are generally kept in ignorance. One of their principal duties,
arising from the statute of Winchester, which appoints them, is to
keep watch and ward in their respective jurisdictions. Ward, guard, or
_custodia_, is chiefly intended of the day time, in order to apprehend
rioters, and robbers on the highways; the manner of doing which is
left to the discretion of the justices of the peace and the
constable[d], the hundred being however answerable for all robberies
committed therein, by day light, for having kept negligent guard.
Watch is properly applicable to the night only, (being called among
our Teutonic ancestors _wacht_ or _wacta_[e]) and it begins at the
time when ward ends, and ends when that begins; for, by the statute of
Winchester, in walled towns the gates shall be closed from sunsetting
to sunrising, and watch shall be kept in every borough and town,
especially in the summer season, to apprehend all rogues, vagabonds,
and night-walkers, and make them give an account of themselves. The
constable may appoint watchmen at his discretion, regulated by the
custom of the place; and these, being his deputies, have for the time
being the authority of their principal. But, with regard to the
infinite number of other minute duties, that are laid upon constables
by a diversity of statutes, I must again refer to Mr Lambard and Dr
Burn; in whose compilations may be also seen, what duties belong to
the constable or tything-man indifferently, and what to the constable
only: for the constable may do whatever the tything-man may; but it
does not hold _e converso_; for the tithing-man has not an equal power
with the constable.

[Footnote d: Dalt. just. c. 104.]

[Footnote e: _Excubias et explorationes quas wactas vocant._
_Capitular. Hludovic. Pii._ _cap._ 1. _A.D._ 815.]

V. WE are next to consider the surveyors of the highways. Every parish
is bound of common right to keep the high roads, that go through it,
in good and sufficient repair; unless by reason of the tenure of
lands, or otherwise, this care is consigned to some particular private
person. From this burthen no man was exempt by our antient laws,
whatever other immunities he might enjoy: this being part of the
_trinoda necessitas_, to which every man's estate was subject; viz.
_expeditio contra hostem, arcium constructio, et pontium reparatio_:
for, though the reparation of bridges only is expressed, yet that of
roads also must be understood; as in the Roman law, _ad instructiones
reparationesque itinerum et pontium, nullum genus hominum, nulliusque
dignitatis ac venerationis meritis, cessare oportet_[f]. And indeed
now, for the most part, the care of the roads only seems to be left to
parishes; that of bridges being in great measure devolved upon the
county at large, by statute 22 Hen. VIII. c. 5. If the parish
neglected these repairs, they might formerly, as they may still, be
indicted for such their neglect: but it was not then incumbent on any
particular officer to call the parish together, and set them upon this
work; for which reason by the statute 2 & 3 Ph. & M. c. 8. surveyors
of the highways were ordered to be chosen in every parish[g].

[Footnote f: _C._ 11. 74. 4.]

[Footnote g: This office, Mr Dalton (just. cap. 50.) says, exactly
answers that of the _curatores viarum_ of the Romans: but, I should
guess that theirs was an office of rather more dignity and authority
than ours, not only from comparing the method of making and mending
the Roman ways with those of our country parishes; but also because
one Thermus, who was the curator of the Flaminian way, was candidate
for the consulship with Julius Caesar. (_Cic. ad Attic._ _l._ 1. _ep._
1.)]

THESE surveyors were originally, according to the statute of Philip
and Mary, to be appointed by the constable and churchwardens of the
parish; but now[h] they are constituted by two neighbouring justices,
out of such substantial inhabitants as have either 10_l._ _per annum_
of their own, or rent 30_l._ a year, or are worth in personal estate
100_l._

[Footnote h: Stat. 3 W. & M. c. 12.]

THEIR office and duty consists in putting in execution a variety of
statutes for the repairs of the highways; that is, of ways leading
from one town to another: by which it is enacted, 1. That they may
remove all annoyances in the highways, or give notice to the owner to
remove them; who is liable to penalties on noncompliance. 2. They are
to call together all the inhabitants of the parish, six days in every
year, to labour in repairing the highways; all persons keeping
draughts, or occupying lands, being obliged to send a team for every
draught, and for every 50_l._ a year, which they keep or occupy; and
all other persons to work or find a labourer. The work must be
completed before harvest; as well for providing a good road for
carrying in the corn, as also because all hands are then supposed to
be employed in harvest work. And every cartway must be made eight feet
wide at the least[i]; and may be increased by the quarter sessions to
the breadth of four and twenty feet. 3. The surveyors may lay out
their own money in purchasing materials for repairs, where there is
not sufficient within the parish, and shall be reimbursed by a rate,
to be allowed at a special sessions. 4. In case the personal labour of
the parish be not sufficient, the surveyors, with the consent of the
quarter sessions, may levy a rate (not exceeding 6_d._ in the pound)
on the parish, in aid of the personal duty; for the due application of
which they are to account upon oath. As for turnpikes, which are now
universally introduced in aid of such rates, and the law relating to
them, these depend entirely on the particular powers granted in the
several road acts, and therefore have nothing to do with this
compendium of general law.

[Footnote i: This, by the laws of the twelve tables at Rome, was the
standard for roads that were straight; but, in winding ways, the
breadth was directed to be sixteen feet. _Ff._ 8. 3. 8.]

VI. I PROCEED therefore, lastly, to consider the overseers of the
poor; their original, appointment, and duty.

THE poor of England, till the time of Henry VIII, subsisted entirely
upon private benevolence, and the charity of welldisposed christians.
For, though it appears by the mirrour[k], that by the common law the
poor were to be "sustained by parsons, rectors of the church, and the
parishioners; so that none of them dye for default of sustenance;" and
though by the statutes 12 Ric. II. c. 7. and 19 Hen. VII. c. 12. the
poor are directed to be sustained in the cities or towns wherein they
were born, or such wherein they had dwelt for three years (which seem
to be the first rudiments of parish settlements) yet till the statute
27 Hen. VIII. c. 26. I find no compulsory method chalked out for this
purpose: but the poor seem to have been left to such relief as the
humanity of their neighbours would afford them. The monasteries were,
in particular, their principal resource; and, among other bad effects
which attended the monastic institutions, it was not perhaps one of
the least (though frequently esteemed quite otherwise) that they
supported and fed a very numerous and very idle poor, whose sustenance
depended upon what was daily distributed in alms at the gates of the
religious houses. But, upon the total dissolution of these, the
inconvenience of thus encouraging the poor in habits of indolence and
beggary was quickly felt throughout the kingdom: and abundance of
statutes were made in the reign of king Henry the eighth, for
providing for the poor and impotent; which, the preambles to some of
them recite, had of late years _strangely_ increased. These poor were
principally of two sorts: sick and impotent, and therefore unable to
work; idle and sturdy, and therefore able, but not willing, to
exercise any honest employment. To provide in some measure for both of
these, in and about the metropolis, his son Edward the sixth founded
three royal hospitals; Christ's, and St. Thomas's, for the relief of
the impotent through infancy or sickness; and Bridewell for the
punishment and employment of the vigorous and idle. But these were far
from being sufficient for the care of the poor throughout the kingdom
at large; and therefore, after many other fruitless experiments, by
statute 43 Eliz. c. 2. overseers of the poor were appointed in every
parish.

[Footnote k: c. 1. §. 3.]

BY virtue of the statute last mentioned, these overseers are to be
nominated yearly in Easter-week, or within one month after, by two
justices dwelling near the parish. They must be substantial
householders, and so expressed to be in the appointment of the
justices[l].

[Footnote l: 2 Lord Raym. 1394.]

THEIR office and duty, according to the same statute, are principally
these: first, to raise competent sums for the necessary relief of the
poor, impotent, old, blind, and such other, being poor and not able to
work: and, secondly, to provide work for such as are able, and cannot
otherwise get employment: but this latter part of their duty, which,
according to the wise regulations of that salutary statute, should go
hand in hand with the other, is now most shamefully neglected.
However, for these joint purposes, they are empowered to make and levy
rates upon the several inhabitants of the parish, by the same act of
parliament; which has been farther explained and enforced by several
subsequent statutes.

THE two great objects of this statute seem to have been, 1. To relieve
the impotent poor, and them only. 2. To find employment for such as
are able to work: and this principally by providing stocks to be
worked up at home, which perhaps might be more beneficial than
accumulating all the poor in one common work-house; a practice which
tends to destroy all domestic connexions (the only felicity of the
honest and industrious labourer) and to put the sober and diligent
upon a level, in point of their earnings, with those who are dissolute
and idle. Whereas, if none were to be relieved but those who are
incapable to get their livings, and that in proportion to their
incapacity; if no children were to be removed from their parents, but
such as are brought up in rags and idleness; and if every poor man and
his family were employed whenever they requested it, and were allowed
the whole profits of their labour;--a spirit of chearful industry
would soon diffuse itself through every cottage; work would become
easy and habitual, when absolutely necessary to their daily
subsistence; and the most indigent peasant would go through his task
without a murmur, if assured that he and his children (when incapable
of work through infancy, age, or infirmity) would then, and then only,
be intitled to support from his opulent neighbours.

THIS appears to have been the plan of the statute of queen Elizabeth;
in which the only defect was confining the management of the poor to
small, parochial, districts; which are frequently incapable of
furnishing proper work, or providing an able director. However, the
laborious poor were then at liberty to seek employment wherever it was
to be had; none being obliged to reside in the places of their
settlement, but such as were unable or unwilling to work; and those
places of settlement being only such where they were born, or had made
their abode, originally for three years[m], and afterwards (in the
case of vagabonds) for one year only[n].

[Footnote m: Stat. 19 Hen. VII. c. 12. 1 Edw. VI. c. 3. 3 Edw. VI. c.
16. 14 Eliz. c. 5.]

[Footnote n: Stat. 39 Eliz. c. 4.]

AFTER the restoration, a very different plan was adopted, which has
rendered the employment of the poor more difficult, by authorizing the
subdivision of parishes; has greatly increased their number, by
confining them all to their respective districts; has given birth to
the intricacy of our poor-laws, by multiplying and rendering more easy
the methods of gaining settlements; and, in consequence, has created
an infinity of expensive lawsuits between contending neighbourhoods,
concerning those settlements and removals. By the statute 13 & 14 Car.
II. c. 12. a legal settlement was declared to be gained by birth,
inhabitancy, apprenticeship, or service for forty days; within which
period all intruders were made removeable from any parish by two
justices of the peace, unless they settled in a tenement of the annual
value of 10_l._ The frauds, naturally consequent upon this provision,
which gave a settlement by so short a residence, produced the statute
1 Jac. II. c. 17. which directed notice in writing to be delivered to
the parish officers, before a settlement could be gained by such
residence. Subsequent provisions allowed other circumstances of
notoriety to be equivalent to such notice given; and those
circumstances have from time to time been altered, enlarged, or
restrained, whenever the experience of new inconveniences, arising
daily from new regulations, suggested the necessity of a remedy. And
the doctrine of certificates was invented, by way of counterpoise, to
restrain a man and his family from acquiring a new settlement by any
length of residence whatever, unless in two particular excepted cases;
which makes parishes very cautious of giving such certificates, and
of course confines the poor at home, where frequently no adequate
employment can be had.

THE law of settlements may be therefore now reduced to the following
general heads; or, a settlement in a parish may be acquired, 1. By
birth; which is always _prima facie_ the place of settlement, until
some other can be shewn[o]. This is also always the place of
settlement of a bastard child; for a bastard, having in the eye of the
law no father, cannot be referred to _his_ settlement, as other
children may[p]. But, in legitimate children, though the place of
birth be _prima facie_ the settlement, yet it is not conclusively so;
for there are, 2. Settlements by parentage, being the settlement of
one's father or mother: all children being really settled in the
parish where their parents are settled, until they get a new
settlement for themselves[q]. A new settlement may be acquired several
ways; as, 3. By marriage. For a woman, marrying a man that is settled
in another parish, changes her own: the law not permitting the
separation of husband and wife[r]. But if the man be a foreigner, and
has no settlement, her's is suspended during his life, if he be able
to maintain her; but after his death she may return again to her old
settlement[s]. The other methods of acquiring settlements in any
parish are all reducible to this one, of forty days residence therein:
but this forty days residence (which is construed to be lodging or
lying there) must not be by fraud, or stealth, or in any clandestine
manner; but accompanied with one or other of the following concomitant
circumstances. The next method therefore of gaining a settlement, is,
4. By forty days residence, and notice. For if a stranger comes into a
parish, and delivers notice in writing of his place of abode, and
number of his family, to one of the overseers (which must be read in
the church and registered) and resides there unmolested for forty days
after such notice, he is legally settled thereby[t]. For the law
presumes that such a one at the time of notice is not likely to
become chargeable, else he would not venture to give it; or that, in
such case, the parish would take care to remove him. But there are
also other circumstances equivalent to such notice: therefore, 5.
Renting for a year a tenement of the yearly value of ten pounds, and
residing forty days in the parish, gains a settlement without
notice[u]; upon the principle of having substance enough to gain
credit for such a house. 6. Being charged to and paying the public
taxes and levies of the parish; and, 7. Executing any public parochial
office for a whole year in the parish, as churchwarden, &c; are both
of them equivalent to notice, and gain a settlement[w], when coupled
with a residence of forty days. 8. Being hired for a year, when
unmarried, and serving a year in the same service; and 9. Being bound
an apprentice for seven years; give the servant and apprentice a
settlement, without notice[x], in that place wherein they serve the
last forty days. This is meant to encourage application to trades, and
going out to reputable services. 10. Lastly, the having an estate of
one's own, and residing thereon forty days, however small the value
may be, in case it be acquired by act of law or of a third person, as
by descent, gift, devise, &c, is a sufficient settlement[y]: but if a
man acquire it by his own act, as by purchase, (in it's popular sense,
in consideration of money paid) then[z] unless the consideration
advanced, _bona fide_, be 30_l._ it is no settlement for any longer
time, than the person shall inhabit thereon. He is in no case
removeable from his own property; but he shall not, by any trifling or
fraudulent purchase of his own, acquire a permanent and lasting
settlement.

[Footnote o: 1 Lord Raym. 567.]

[Footnote p: Salk. 427.]

[Footnote q: Salk. 528. 2 Lord Raym. 1473.]

[Footnote r: Stra. 544.]

[Footnote s: Foley. 249.]

[Footnote t: Stat. 13 & 14 Car. II c. 12. 1 Jac. II. c. 17. 3 & 4 W. &
M. c. 11.]

[Footnote u: Stat. 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 12.]

[Footnote w: Stat. 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 11.]

[Footnote x: Stat. 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 11. 8 & 9 W. III. c. 10. and 31
Geo. II. c. 11.]

[Footnote y: Salk. 524.]

[Footnote z: Stat. 9 Geo. I. c. 7.]

ALL persons, not so settled, may be removed to their own parishes, on
complaint of the overseers, by two justices of the peace, if they
shall adjudge them likely to become chargeable to the parish, into
which they have intruded: unless they are in a way of getting a legal
settlement, as by having hired a house of 10_l._ _per annum_, or
living in an annual service; for then they are not removeable[a]. And
in all other cases, if the parish to which they belong, will grant
them a certificate, acknowleging them to be _their_ parishioners, they
cannot be removed merely because _likely_ to become chargeable, but
only when they become _actually_ chargeable[b]. But such certificated
persons can gain no settlement by any of the means above-mentioned;
unless by renting a tenement of 10_l._ _per annum_, or by serving an
annual office in the parish, being legally placed therein: neither can
an apprentice or servant to such certificated person gain a settlement
by such their service[c].

[Footnote a: Salk. 472.]

[Footnote b: Stat. 8 & 9 W. III. c. 30.]

[Footnote c: Stat. 12 Ann. c. 18.]

THESE are the general heads of the laws relating to the poor, which,
by the resolutions of the courts of justice thereon within a century
past, are branched into a great variety. And yet, notwithstanding the
pains that has been taken about them, they still remain very
imperfect, and inadequate to the purposes they are designed for: a
fate, that has generally attended most of our statute laws, where they
have not the foundation of the common law to build on. When the
shires, the hundreds, and the tithings, were kept in the same
admirable order that they were disposed in by the great Alfred, there
were no persons idle, consequently none but the impotent that needed
relief: and the statute of 43 Eliz. seems entirely founded on the same
principle. But when this excellent scheme was neglected and departed
from, we cannot but observe with concern, what miserable shifts and
lame expedients have from time to time been adopted, in order to patch
up the flaws occasioned by this neglect. There is not a more necessary
or more certain maxim in the frame and constitution of society, than
that every individual must contribute his share, in order to the
well-being of the community: and surely they must be very deficient in
sound policy, who suffer one half of a parish to continue idle,
dissolute, and unemployed; and then form visionary schemes, and at
length are amazed to find, that the industry of the other half is not
able to maintain the whole.




CHAPTER THE TENTH.

OF THE PEOPLE, WHETHER ALIENS, DENIZENS, OR NATIVES.


HAVING, in the eight preceding chapters, treated of persons as they
stand in the public relations of _magistrates_, I now proceed to
consider such persons as fall under the denomination of the _people_.
And herein all the inferior and subordinate magistrates, treated of in
the last chapter, are included.

THE first and most obvious division of the people is into aliens and
natural-born subjects. Natural-born subjects are such as are born
within the dominions of the crown of England, that is, within the
ligeance, or as it is generally called, the allegiance of the king;
and aliens, such as are born out of it. Allegiance is the tie, or
_ligamen_, which binds the subject to the king, in return for that
protection which the king affords the subject. The thing itself, or
substantial part of it, is founded in reason and the nature of
government; the name and the form are derived to us from our Gothic
ancestors. Under the feodal system, every owner of lands held them in
subjection to some superior or lord, from whom or whose ancestors the
tenant or vasal had received them: and there was a mutual trust or
confidence subsisting between the lord and vasal, that the lord should
protect the vasal in the enjoyment of the territory he had granted
him, and, on the other hand, that the vasal should be faithful to the
lord and defend him against all his enemies. This obligation on the
part of the vasal was called his _fidelitas_ or fealty; and an oath of
fealty was required, by the feodal law, to be taken by all tenants to
their landlord, which is couched in almost the same terms as our
antient oath of allegiance[a]: except that in the usual oath of fealty
there was frequently a saving or exception of the faith due to a
superior lord by name, under whom the landlord himself was perhaps
only a tenant or vasal. But when the acknowlegement was made to the
absolute superior himself, who was vasal to no man, it was no longer
called the oath of fealty, but the oath of allegiance; and therein the
tenant swore to bear faith to his sovereign lord, in opposition to all
men, without any saving or exception: "_contra omnes homines
fidelitatem fecit_[b]." Land held by this exalted species of fealty
was called _feudum ligium_, a liege fee; the vasals _homines ligii_,
or liege men; and the sovereign their _dominus ligius_, or liege lord.
And when sovereign princes did homage to each other, for lands held
under their respective sovereignties, a distinction was always made
between _simple_ homage, which was only an acknowlegement of
tenure[c]; and _liege_ homage, which included the fealty
before-mentioned, and the services consequent upon it. Thus when
Edward III, in 1329, did homage to Philip VI of France, for his ducal
dominions on that continent, it was warmly disputed of what species
the homage was to be, whether _liege_ or _simple_ homage[d]. With us
in England, it becoming a settled principle of tenure, that _all_
lands in the kingdom are holden of the king as their sovereign and
lord paramount, no oath but that of fealty could ever be taken to
inferior lords, and the oath of allegiance was necessarily confined to
the person of the king alone. By an easy analogy the term of
allegiance was soon brought to signify all other engagements, which
are due from subjects to their prince, as well as those duties which
were simply and merely territorial. And the oath of allegiance, as
administred for upwards of six hundred years[e], contained a promise
"to be true and faithful to the king and his heirs, and truth and
faith to bear of life and limb and terrene honour, and not to know or
hear of any ill or damage intended him, without defending him
therefrom." Upon which sir Matthew Hale[f] makes this remark; that it
was short and plain, not entangled with long or intricate clauses or
declarations, and yet is comprehensive of the whole duty from the
subject to his sovereign. But, at the revolution, the terms of this
oath being thought perhaps to favour too much the notion of
non-resistance, the present form was introduced by the convention
parliament, which is more general and indeterminate than the former;
the subject only promising "that he will be faithful and bear _true_
allegiance to the king," without mentioning "his heirs," or specifying
in the least wherein that allegiance consists. The oath of supremacy
is principally calculated as a renuntiation of the pope's pretended
authority: and the oath of abjuration, introduced in the reign of king
William[g], very amply supplies the loose and general texture of the
oath of allegiance; it recognizing the right of his majesty, derived
under the act of settlement; engaging to support him to the utmost of
the juror's power; promising to disclose all traiterous conspiracies
against him; and expressly renouncing any claim of the pretender, by
name, in as clear and explicit terms as the English language can
furnish. This oath must be taken by all persons in any office, trust,
or employment; and may be tendered by two justices of the peace to any
person, whom they shall suspect of disaffection[h]. But the oath of
allegiance may be tendered[i] to all persons above the age of twelve
years, whether natives, denizens, or aliens, either in the court-leet
of the manor, or in the sheriff's tourn, which is the court-leet of
the county.

[Footnote a: 2 _Feud._ 5, 6, 7.]

[Footnote b: 2 _Feud._ 99.]

[Footnote c: 7 Rep. Calvin's case. 7.]

[Footnote d: 2 Carte. 401. Mod. Un. Hist. xxiii. 420.]

[Footnote e: Mirror. _c._ 3. §. 35. Fleta. 3. 16. Britton. _c._ 29. 7
Rep. Calvin's case. 6.]

[Footnote f: 1 Hal. P.C. 63.]

[Footnote g: Stat. 13 W. III. c. 6.]

[Footnote h: Stat. 1 Geo. I. c. 13.]

[Footnote i: 2 Inst. 121. 1 Hal. P.C. 64.]

BUT, besides these express engagements, the law also holds that there
is an implied, original, and virtual allegiance, owing from every
subject to his sovereign, antecedently to any express promise; and
although the subject never swore any faith or allegiance in form. For
as the king, by the very descent of the crown, is fully invested with
all the rights and bound to all the duties of sovereignty, before his
coronation; so the subject is bound to his prince by an intrinsic
allegiance, before the superinduction of those outward bonds of oath,
homage, and fealty; which were only instituted to remind the subject
of this his previous duty, and for the better securing it's
performance[k]. The formal profession therefore, or oath of
subjection, is nothing more than a declaration in words of what was
before implied in law. Which occasions sir Edward Coke very justly to
observe[l], that "all subjects are equally bounden to their
allegiance, as if they had taken the oath; because it is written by
the finger of the law in their hearts, and the taking of the corporal
oath is but an outward declaration of the same." The sanction of an
oath, it is true, in case of violation of duty, makes the guilt still
more accumulated, by superadding perjury to treason; but it does not
encrease the civil obligation to loyalty; it only strengthens the
_social_ tie by uniting it with that of _religion_.

[Footnote k: 1 Hal. P.C. 61.]

[Footnote l: 2 Inst. 121.]

ALLEGIANCE, both express and implied, is however distinguished by the
law into two sorts or species, the one natural, the other local; the
former being also perpetual, the latter temporary. Natural allegiance
is such as is due from all men born within the king's dominions
immediately upon their birth[m]. For, immediately upon their birth,
they are under the king's protection; at a time too, when (during
their infancy) they are incapable of protecting themselves. Natural
allegiance is therefore a debt of gratitude; which cannot be
forfeited, cancelled, or altered, by any change of time, place, or
circumstance, nor by any thing but the united concurrence of the
legislature[n]. An Englishman who removes to France, or to China, owes
the same allegiance to the king of England there as at home, and
twenty years hence as well as now. For it is a principle of universal
law[o], that the natural-born subject of one prince cannot by any act
of his own, no, not by swearing allegiance to another, put off or
discharge his natural allegiance to the former: for this natural
allegiance was intrinsic, and primitive, and antecedent to the other;
and cannot be devested without the concurrent act of that prince to
whom it was first due. Indeed the natural-born subject of one prince,
to whom he owes allegiance, may be entangled by subjecting himself
absolutely to another; but it is his own act that brings him into
these straits and difficulties, of owing service to two masters; and
it is unreasonable that, by such voluntary act of his own, he should
be able at pleasure to unloose those bands, by which he is connected
to his natural prince.

[Footnote m: 7 Rep. 7.]

[Footnote n: 2 P. Wms. 124.]

[Footnote o: 1 Hal. P.C. 68.]

LOCAL allegiance is such as is due from an alien, or stranger born,
for so long time as he continues within the king's dominion and
protection[p]: and it ceases, the instant such stranger transfers
himself from this kingdom to another. Natural allegiance is therefore
perpetual, and local temporary only: and that for this reason,
evidently founded upon the nature of government; that allegiance is a
debt due from the subject, upon an implied contract with the prince,
that so long as the one affords protection, so long the other will
demean himself faithfully. As therefore the prince is always under a
constant tie to protect his natural-born subjects, at all times and in
all countries, for this reason their allegiance due to him is equally
universal and permanent. But, on the other hand, as the prince affords
his protection to an alien, only during his residence in this realm,
the allegiance of an alien is confined (in point of time) to the
duration of such his residence, and (in point of locality) to the
dominions of the British empire. From which considerations sir Matthew
Hale[q] deduces this consequence, that, though there be an usurper of
the crown, yet it is treason for any subject, while the usurper is in
full possession of the sovereignty, to practice any thing against his
crown and dignity: wherefore, although the true prince regain the
sovereignty, yet such attempts against the usurper (unless in defence
or aid of the rightful king) have been afterwards punished with death;
because of the breach of that temporary allegiance, which was due to
him as king _de facto_. And upon this footing, after Edward IV
recovered the crown, which had been long detained from his house by
the line of Lancaster, treasons committed against Henry VI were
capitally punished, though Henry had been declared an usurper by
parliament.

[Footnote p: 7 Rep. 6.]

[Footnote q: 1 Hal. P.C. 60.]

THIS oath of allegiance, or rather the allegiance itself, is held to
be applicable not only to the political capacity of the king, or regal
office, but to his natural person, and blood-royal: and for the
misapplication of their allegiance, viz. to the regal capacity or
crown, exclusive of the person of the king, were the Spencers banished
in the reign of Edward II[r]. And from hence arose that principle of
personal attachment, and affectionate loyalty, which induced our
forefathers (and, if occasion required, would doubtless induce their
sons) to hazard all that was dear to them, life, fortune, and family,
in defence and support of their liege lord and sovereign.

[Footnote r: 1 Hal. P.C. 67.]

THIS allegiance then, both express and implied, is the duty of all the
king's subjects, under the distinctions here laid down, of local and
temporary, or universal and perpetual. Their rights are also
distinguishable by the same criterions of time and locality;
natural-born subjects having a great variety of rights, which they
acquire by being born within the king's ligeance, and can never
forfeit by any distance of place or time, but only by their own
misbehaviour: the explanation of which rights is the principal subject
of the two first books of these commentaries. The same is also in some
degree the case of aliens; though their rights are much more
circumscribed, being acquired only by residence here, and lost
whenever they remove. I shall however here endeavour to chalk out some
of the principal lines, whereby they are distinguished from natives,
descending to farther particulars when they come in course.

AN alien born may purchase lands, or other estates: but not for his
own use; for the king is thereupon entitled to them[s]. If an alien
could acquire a permanent property in lands, he must owe an
allegiance, equally permanent with that property, to the king of
England; which would probably be inconsistent with that, which he owes
to his own natural liege lord: besides that thereby the nation might
in time be subject to foreign influence, and feel many other
inconveniences. Wherefore by the civil law such contracts were also
made void[t]: but the prince had no such advantage of escheat thereby,
as with us in England. Among other reasons, which might be given for
our constitution, it seems to be intended by way of punishment for the
alien's presumption, in attempting to acquire any landed property: for
the vendor is not affected by it, he having resigned his right, and
received an equivalent in exchange. Yet an alien may acquire a
property in goods, money, and other personal estate, or may hire a
house for his habitation[u]: for personal estate is of a transitory
and moveable nature; and, besides, this indulgence to strangers is
necessary for the advancement of trade. Aliens also may trade as
freely as other people; only they are subject to certain higher duties
at the custom-house: and there are also some obsolete statutes of
Henry VIII, prohibiting alien artificers to work for themselves in
this kingdom; but it is generally held they were virtually repealed by
statute 5 Eliz. c. 7. Also an alien may bring an action concerning
personal property, and may make a will, and dispose of his personal
estate[w]: not as it is in France, where the king at the death of an
alien is entitled to all he is worth, by the _droit d'aubaine_ or _jus
albinatus_[x], unless he has a peculiar exemption. When I mention
these rights of an alien, I must be understood of alien-friends only,
or such whose countries are in peace with ours; for alien-enemies
have no rights, no privileges, unless by the king's special favour,
during the time of war.

[Footnote s: Co. Litt. 2.]

[Footnote t: _Cod._ _l._ 11. _tit._ 55.]

[Footnote u: 7 Rep. 17.]

[Footnote w: Lutw. 34.]

[Footnote x: The word is derived from _alibi natus_; Spelm. Gl. 24.]

WHEN I say, that an alien is one who is born out of the king's
dominions, or allegiance, this also must be understood with some
restrictions. The common law indeed stood absolutely so; with only a
very few exceptions: so that a particular act of parliament became
necessary after the restoration[y], for the naturalization of children
of his majesty's English subjects, born in foreign countries during
the late troubles. And this maxim of the law proceeded upon a general
principle, that every man owes natural allegiance where he is born,
and cannot owe two such allegiances, or serve two masters, at once.
Yet the children of the king's embassadors born abroad were always
held to be natural subjects[z]: for as the father, though in a foreign
country, owes not even a local allegiance to the prince to whom he is
sent; so, with regard to the son also, he was held (by a kind of
_postliminium_) to be born under the king of England's allegiance,
represented by his father, the embassador. To encourage also foreign
commerce, it was enacted by statute 25 Edw. III. st. 2. that all
children born abroad, provided _both_ their parents were at the time
of the birth in allegiance to the king, and the mother had passed the
seas by her husband's consent, might inherit as if born in England:
and accordingly it hath been so adjudged in behalf of merchants[a].
But by several more modern statutes[b] these restrictions are still
farther taken off: so that all children, born out of the king's
ligeance, whose _fathers_ were natural-born subjects, are now
natural-born subjects themselves, to all intents and purposes, without
any exception; unless their said fathers were attainted, or banished
beyond sea, for high treason; or were then in the service of a prince
at enmity with Great Britain.

[Footnote y: Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 6.]

[Footnote z: 7 Rep. 18.]

[Footnote a: Cro. Car. 601. Mar. 91. Jenk. Cent. 3.]

[Footnote b: 7 Ann. c. 5. and 4 Geo. II. c. 21.]

THE children of aliens, born here in England, are, generally speaking,
natural-born subjects, and entitled to all the privileges of such. In
which the constitution of France differs from ours; for there, by
their _jus albinatus_, if a child be born of foreign parents, it is an
alien[c].

[Footnote c: Jenk. Cent. 3. cites _treasure françois_, 312.]

A DENIZEN is an alien born, but who has obtained _ex donatione regis_
letters patent to make him an English subject: a high and
incommunicable branch of the royal prerogative[d]. A denizen is in a
kind of middle state between an alien, and natural-born subject, and
partakes of both of them. He may take lands by purchase or devise,
which an alien may not; but cannot take by inheritance[e]: for his
parent, through whom he must claim, being an alien had no inheritable
blood, and therefore could convey none to the son. And, upon a like
defect of hereditary blood, the issue of a denizen, born _before_
denization, cannot inherit to him; but his issue born _after_, may[f].
A denizen is not excused[g] from paying the alien's duty, and some
other mercantile burthens. And no denizen can be of the privy council,
or either house of parliament, or have any office of trust, civil or
military, or be capable of any grant from the crown[h].

[Footnote d: 7 Rep. Calvin's case. 25.]

[Footnote e: 11 Rep. 67.]

[Footnote f: Co. Litt. 8. Vaugh. 285.]

[Footnote g: Stat. 22 Hen. VIII. c. 8.]

[Footnote h: Stat. 12 W. III. c. 2.]

NATURALIZATION cannot be performed but by act of parliament: for by
this an alien is put in exactly the same state as if he had been born
in the king's ligeance; except only that he is incapable, as well as a
denizen, of being a member of the privy council, or parliament, &c[i].
No bill for naturalization can be received in either house of
parliament, without such disabling clause in it[k]. Neither can any
person be naturalized or restored in blood, unless he hath received
the sacrament of the Lord's supper within one month before the
bringing in of the bill; and unless he also takes the oaths of
allegiance and supremacy in the presence of the parliament[l].

[Footnote i: _Ibid._]

[Footnote k: Stat. 1 Geo. I. c. 4.]

[Footnote l: Stat. 7 Jac. I. c. 2.]

THESE are the principal distinctions between aliens, denizens, and
natives: distinctions, which endeavors have been frequently used since
the commencement of this century to lay almost totally aside, by one
general naturalization-act for all foreign protestants. An attempt
which was once carried into execution by the statute 7 Ann. c. 5. but
this, after three years experience of it, was repealed by the statute
10 Ann. c. 5. except one clause, which was just now mentioned, for
naturalizing the children of English parents born abroad. However,
every foreign seaman who in time of war serves two years on board an
English ship is _ipso facto_ naturalized[m]; and all foreign
protestants, and Jews, upon their residing seven years in any of the
American colonies, without being absent above two months at a time,
are upon taking the oaths naturalized to all intents and purposes, as
if they had been born in this kingdom[n]; and therefore are admissible
to all such privileges, and no other, as protestants or Jews born in
this kingdom are entitled to. What those privileges are[o], was the
subject of very high debates about the time of the famous Jew-bill[p];
which enabled all Jews to prefer bills of naturalization in
parliament, without receiving the sacrament, as ordained by statute 7
Jac. I. It is not my intention to revive this controversy again; for
the act lived only a few months, and was then repealed[q]: therefore
peace be now to it's _manes_.

[Footnote m: Stat. 13 Geo. II. c. 3.]

[Footnote n: Stat. 13 Geo. II. c. 7. 20 Geo. II. c. 24. 2 Geo. III. c.
25.]

[Footnote o: A pretty accurate account of the Jews, till their
banishment in 8 Edw. I. may be found in Molloy _de jure maritimo_, b.
3. c. 6.]

[Footnote p: Stat. 26 Geo. II. c. 26.]

[Footnote q: Stat. 27 Geo. II. c. 1.]




CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.

OF THE CLERGY.


THE people, whether aliens, denizens, or natural-born subjects, are
divisible into two kinds; the clergy and laity: the clergy,
comprehending all persons in holy orders, and in ecclesiastical
offices, will be the subject of the following chapter.

THIS venerable body of men, being separate and set apart from the rest
of the people, in order to attend the more closely to the service of
almighty God, have thereupon large privileges allowed them by our
municipal laws: and had formerly much greater, which were abridged at
the time of the reformation, on account of the ill use which the
popish clergy had endeavoured to make of them. For, the laws having
exempted them from almost every personal duty, they attempted a total
exemption from every secular tie. But it is observed by sir Edward
Coke[a], that, as the overflowing of waters doth many times make the
river to lose it's proper chanel, so in times past ecclesiastical
persons, seeking to extend their liberties beyond their true bounds,
either lost or enjoyed not those which of right belonged to them. The
personal exemptions do indeed for the most part continue. A clergyman
cannot be compelled to serve on a jury, nor to appear at a court-leet
or view of frank pledge; which almost every other person is obliged to
do[b]: but, if a layman is summoned on a jury, and before the trial
takes orders, he shall notwithstanding appear and be sworn[c]. Neither
can he be chosen to any temporal office; as bailiff, reeve, constable,
or the like: in regard of his own continual attendance on the sacred
function[d]. During his attendance on divine service he is privileged
from arrests in civil suits[e]. In cases also of felony, a clerk in
orders shall have the benefit of his clergy, without being branded in
the hand; and may likewise have it more than once: in both which
particulars he is distinguished from a layman[f]. But as they have
their privileges, so also they have their disabilities, on account of
their spiritual avocations. Clergymen, we have seen[g], are incapable
of sitting in the house of commons; and by statute 21 Hen. VIII. c.
13. are not allowed to take any lands or tenements to farm, upon pain
of 10_l._ _per_ month, and total avoidance of the lease; nor shall
engage in any manner of trade, nor sell any merchandize, under
forfeiture of the treble value. Which prohibition is consonant to the
canon law.

[Footnote a: 2 Inst. 4.]

[Footnote b: F.N.B. 160. 2 Inst. 4.]

[Footnote c: 4 Leon. 190.]

[Footnote d: Finch. L. 88.]

[Footnote e: Stat. 50 Edw. III. c. 5. 1 Ric. II. c. 16.]

[Footnote f: 2 Inst. 637. Stat. 4 Hen. VII. c. 13. & 1 Edw. VI. c.
12.]

[Footnote g: page 169.]

IN the frame and constitution of ecclesiastical polity there are
divers ranks and degrees: which I shall consider in their respective
order, merely as they are taken notice of by the secular laws of
England; without intermeddling with the canons and constitutions, by
which they have bound themselves. And under each division I shall
consider, 1. The method of their appointment; 2. Their rights and
duties; and 3. The manner wherein their character or office may cease.

I. AN arch-bishop or bishop is elected by the chapter of his cathedral
church, by virtue of a licence from the crown. Election was, in very
early times, the usual mode of elevation to the episcopal chair
throughout all christendom; and this was promiscuously performed by
the laity as well as the clergy[h]: till at length, it becoming
tumultuous, the emperors and other sovereigns of the respective
kingdoms of Europe took the election in some degree into their own
hands; by reserving to themselves the right of confirming these
elections, and of granting investiture of the temporalties, which now
began almost universally to be annexed to this spiritual dignity;
without which confirmation and investiture, the elected bishop could
neither be consecrated, nor receive any secular profits. This right
was acknowleged in the emperor Charlemagne, _A.D._ 773, by pope
Hadrian I, and the council of Lateran[i], and universally exercised by
other christian princes: but the policy of the court of Rome at the
same time began by degrees to exclude the laity from any share in
these elections, and to confine them wholly to the clergy, which at
length was completely effected; the mere form of election appearing to
the people to be a thing of little consequence, while the crown was in
possession of an absolute negative, which was almost equivalent to a
direct right of nomination. Hence the right of appointing to
bishopricks is said to have been in the crown of England[k] (as well
as other kingdoms in Europe) even in the Saxon times, because the
rights of confirmation and investiture were in effect (though not in
form) a right of complete donation[l]. But when, by length of time,
the custom of making elections by the clergy only was fully
established, the popes began to except to the usual method of granting
these investitures, which was _per annulum et baculum_, by the
prince's delivering to the prelate a ring, and a pastoral staff or
crosier; pretending, that this was an encroachment on the church's
authority, and an attempt by these symbols to confer a spiritual
jurisdiction: and pope Gregory VII, towards the close of the eleventh
century, published a bulle of excommunication against all princes who
should dare to confer investitures, and all prelates who should
venture to receive them[m]. This was a bold step towards effecting the
plan then adopted by the Roman see, of rendering the clergy intirely
independent of the civil authority: and long and eager were the
contests occasioned by this dispute. But at length when the emperor
Henry V agreed to remove all suspicion of encroachment on the
spiritual character, by conferring investitures for the future _per
sceptrum_ and not _per annulum et baculum_; and when the kings of
England and France consented also to alter the form in their kingdoms,
and receive only homage from the bishops for their temporalties,
instead of investing them by the ring and crosier; the court of Rome
found it prudent to suspend for a while it's other pretensions[n].

[Footnote h: _per clerum et populum._ Palm. 25. 2 Roll. Rep. 102. M.
Paris. _A.D._ 1095.]

[Footnote i: _Decret._ 1. _dist._ 63. _c._ 22.]

[Footnote k: Palm. 28.]

[Footnote l: "_Nulla electio praelatorum (sunt verba Ingulphi) erat
mere libera et canonica; sed omnes dignitates tam episcoporum, quam
abbatum, per annulum et baculum regis curia pro sua complacentia
conferebat._" _Penes clericos et monachos fuit electio, sed electum a
rege postulabant._ Selden. _Jan. Angl._ l. 1. §. 39.]

[Footnote m: _Decret._ 2. _caus._ 16. _qu._ 7. _c._ 12 & 13.]

[Footnote n: Mod. Un. Hist. xxv. 363. xxix. 115.]

THIS concession was obtained from king Henry the first in England, by
means of that obstinate and arrogant prelate, arch-bishop Anselm[o]:
but king John (about a century afterwards) in order to obtain the
protection of the pope against his discontented barons, was prevailed
upon to give up by a charter, to all the monasteries and cathedrals in
the kingdom, the free right of electing their prelates, whether abbots
or bishops: reserving only to the crown the custody of the
temporalties during the vacancy; the form of granting a licence to
elect, (which is the original of our _conge d'eslire_) on refusal
whereof the electors might proceed without it; and the right of
approbation afterwards, which was not to be denied without a
reasonable and lawful cause[p]. This grant was expressly recognized
and confirmed in king John's _magna carta_[q], and was again
established by statute 25 Edw. III. st. 6. §. 3.

[Footnote o: M. Paris. _A.D._ 1107.]

[Footnote p: M. Paris. _A.D._ 1214. 1 Rym. _Foed._ 198.]

[Footnote q: _cap._ 1. _edit. Oxon._ 1759.]

BUT by statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 20. the antient right of nomination
was, in effect, restored to the crown: it being enacted that, at every
future avoidance of a bishoprick, the king may send the dean and
chapter his usual licence to proceed to election; which is always to
be accompanied with a letter missive from the king, containing the
name of the person whom he would have them elect: and, if the dean and
chapter delay their election above twelve days, the nomination shall
devolve to the king, who may by letters patent appoint such person as
he pleases. This election or nomination, if it be of a bishop, must be
signified by the king's letters patent to the arch-bishop of the
province; if it be of an arch-bishop, to the other arch-bishop and two
bishops, or to four bishops; requiring them to confirm, invest, and
consecrate the person so elected: which they are bound to perform
immediately, without any application to the see of Rome. After which
the bishop elect shall sue to the king for his temporalties, shall
make oath to the king and none other, and shall take restitution of
his secular possessions out of the king's hands only. And if such dean
and chapter do not elect in the manner by this act appointed, or if
such arch-bishop or bishop do refuse to confirm, invest, and
consecrate such bishop elect, they shall incur all the penalties of a
_praemunire_.

AN arch-bishop is the chief of the clergy in a whole province; and has
the inspection of the bishops of that province, as well as of the
inferior clergy, and may deprive them on notorious cause[r]. The
arch-bishop has also his own diocese, wherein he exercises episcopal
jurisdiction; as in his province he exercises archiepiscopal. As
arch-bishop, he, upon receipt of the king's writ, calls the bishops
and clergy of his province to meet in convocation: but without the
king's writ he cannot assemble them[s]. To him all appeals are made
from inferior jurisdictions within his province; and, as an appeal
lies from the bishops in person to him in person, so it also lies from
the consistory courts of each diocese to his archiepiscopal court.
During the vacancy of any see in his province, he is guardian of the
spiritualties thereof, as the king is of the temporalties; and he
executes all ecclesiastical jurisdiction therein. If an archiepiscopal
see be vacant, the dean and chapter are the spiritual guardians, ever
since the office of prior of Canterbury was abolished at the
reformation[t]. The arch-bishop is entitled to present by lapse to all
the ecclesiastical livings in the disposal of his diocesan bishops,
if not filled within six months. And the arch-bishop has a customary
prerogative, when a bishop is consecrated by him, to name a clerk or
chaplain of his own to be provided for by such suffragan bishop; in
lieu of which it is now usual for the bishop to make over by deed to
the arch-bishop, his executors and assigns, the next presentation of
such dignity or benefice in the bishop's disposal within that see, as
the arch-bishop himself shall choose; which is therefore called his
option[u]: which options are only binding on the bishop himself who
grants them, and not his successors. The prerogative itself seems to
be derived from the legatine power formerly annexed by the popes to
the metropolitan of Canterbury[w]. And we may add, that the papal
claim itself (like most others of that encroaching see) was probably
set up in imitation of the imperial prerogative called _primae_ or
_primariae preces_; whereby the emperor exercises, and hath
immemorially exercised[x], a right of naming to the first prebend that
becomes vacant after his accession in every church of the empire[y]. A
right, that was also exercised by the crown of England in the reign of
Edward I[z]; and which probably gave rise to the royal corodies, which
were mentioned in a former chapter[a]. It is also the privilege, by
custom, of the arch-bishop of Canterbury, to crown the kings and
queens of this kingdom. And he hath also by the statute 25 Hen. VIII.
c. 21. the power of granting dispensations in any case, not contrary
to the holy scriptures and the law of God, where the pope used
formerly to grant them: which is the foundation of his granting
special licences, to marry at any place or time, to hold two livings,
and the like: and on this also is founded the right he exercises of
conferring degrees, in prejudice of the two universities[b].

[Footnote r: Lord Raym. 541.]

[Footnote s: 4 Inst. 322, 323.]

[Footnote t: 2 Roll. Abr. 223.]

[Footnote u: Cowel's interpr. tit. option.]

[Footnote w: Sherlock of options. 1.]

[Footnote x: Goldast. _constit. imper._ _tom._ 3. _pag._ 406.]

[Footnote y: Dufresne. V. 806. Mod. Un. Hist. xxix. 5.]

[Footnote z: _Rex, &c, salutem. Scribatis episcopo Karl. quod--Roberto
de Icard pensionem suam, quam ad preces regis praedicto Roberto
concessit, de caetero solvat; et de proxima ecclesia vacatura de
collatione praedicti episcopi, quam ipse Robertus acceptaverit,
respiciat._ _Brev._ 11 Edw. I. 3 Pryn. 1264.]

[Footnote a: ch. 8. pag. 273.]

[Footnote b: See the bishop of Chester's case. Oxon. 1721.]

THE power and authority of a bishop, besides the administration of
certain holy ordinances peculiar to that sacred order, consists
principally in inspecting the manners of the people and clergy, and
punishing them, in order to reformation, by ecclesiastical censures.
To this purpose he has several courts under him, and may visit at
pleasure every part of his diocese. His chancellor is appointed to
hold his courts for him, and to assist him in matters of
ecclesiastical law; who, as well as all other ecclesiastical officers,
if lay or married, must be a doctor of the civil law, so created in
some university[c]. It is also the business of a bishop to institute
and to direct induction to all ecclesiastical livings in his diocese.

[Footnote c: Stat. 37 Hen. VIII. c. 17.]

ARCHBISHOPRICKS and bishopricks may become void by death, deprivation
for any very gross and notorious crime, and also by resignation. All
resignations must be made to some superior[d]. Therefore a bishop must
resign to his metropolitan; but the arch-bishop can resign to none but
the king himself.

[Footnote d: Gibs. cod. 822.]

II. A DEAN and chapter are the council of the bishop, to assist him
with their advice in affairs of religion, and also in the temporal
concerns of his see[e]. When the rest of the clergy were settled in
the several parishes of each diocese (as hath formerly[f] been
mentioned) these were reserved for the celebration of divine service
in the bishop's own cathedral; and the chief of them, who presided
over the rest, obtained the name of _decanus_ or dean, being probably
at first appointed to superintend _ten_ canons or prebendaries.

[Footnote e: 3 Rep. 75. Co. Litt. 103, 300.]

[Footnote f: pag. 108, 109.]

ALL antient deans are elected by the chapter, by _conge d'eslire_ from
the king, and letters missive of recommendation; in the same manner as
bishops: but in those chapters, that were founded by Henry VIII out of
the spoils of the dissolved monasteries, the deanery is donative, and
the installation merely by the king's letters patent[g]. The chapter,
consisting of canons or prebendaries, are sometimes appointed by the
king, sometimes by the bishop, and sometimes elected by each other.

[Footnote g: Gibs. cod. 173.]

THE dean and chapter are, as was before observed, the nominal electors
of a bishop. The bishop is their ordinary and immediate superior; and
has, generally speaking, the power of visiting them, and correcting
their excesses and enormities. They had also a check on the bishop at
common law: for till the statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 28. his grant or
lease would not have bound his successors, unless confirmed by the
dean and chapter[h].

[Footnote h: Co. Litt. 103.]

DEANERIES and prebends may become void, like a bishoprick, by death,
by deprivation, or by resignation to either the king or the bishop[j].
Also I may here mention, once for all, that if a dean, prebendary, or
other spiritual person be made a bishop, all the preferments he was
before possessed of are void; and the king may present to them in
right of his prerogative royal. But they are not void by the election,
but only by the consecration[i].

[Footnote j: Plowd. 498.]

[Footnote i: 2 Roll. Abr. 352. Salk. 137. [Transcriber's Note:
Footnotes j and i are in this order in the original.]]

III. AN arch-deacon hath an ecclesiastical jurisdiction, immediately
subordinate to the bishop, throughout the whole of his diocese, or in
some particular part of it. He is usually appointed by the bishop
himself; and hath a kind of episcopal authority, originally derived
from the bishop, but now independent and distinct from his[k]. He
therefore visits the clergy; and has his separate court for punishment
of offenders by spiritual censures, and for hearing all other causes
of ecclesiastical cognizance.

[Footnote k: 1 Burn. eccl. law. 68, 69.]

IV. THE rural deans are very antient officers of the church[l], but
almost grown out of use; though their deaneries still subsist as an
ecclesiastical division of the diocese, or archdeaconry. They seem to
have been deputies of the bishop, planted all round his diocese, the
better to inspect the conduct of the parochial clergy, and therefore
armed with an inferior degree of judicial and coercive authority[m].

[Footnote l: Kennet. par. antiq. 633.]

[Footnote m: Gibs. cod. 972.]

V. THE next, and indeed the most numerous order of men in the system
of ecclesiastical polity, are the parsons and vicars of parishes: in
treating of whom I shall first mark out the distinction between them;
shall next observe the method by which one may become a parson or
vicar; shall then briefly touch upon their rights and duties; and
shall, lastly, shew how one may cease to be either.

A PARSON, _persona ecclesiae_, is one that hath full possession of all
the rights of a parochial church. He is called parson, _persona_,
because by his person the church, which is an invisible body, is
represented; and he is in himself a body corporate, in order to
protect and defend the rights of the church (which he personates) by a
perpetual succession[n]. He is sometimes called the rector, or
governor, of the church: but the appellation of _parson_, (however it
may be depreciated by familiar, clownish, and indiscriminate use) is
the most legal, most beneficial, and most honourable title that a
parish priest can enjoy; because such a one, (sir Edward Coke
observes) and he only, is said _vicem seu personam ecclesiae gerere_.
A parson has, during his life, the freehold in himself of the
parsonage house, the glebe, the tithes, and other dues. But these are
sometimes _appropriated_; that is to say, the benefice is perpetually
annexed to some spiritual corporation, either sole or aggregate, being
the patron of the living; whom the law esteems equally capable of
providing for the service of the church, as any single private
clergyman. This contrivance seems to have sprung from the policy of
the monastic orders, who have never been deficient in subtle
inventions for the increase of their own power and emoluments. At the
first establishment of parochial clergy, the tithes of the parish were
distributed in a fourfold division; one for the use of the bishop,
another for maintaining the fabrick of the church, a third for the
poor, and the fourth to provide for the incumbent. When the sees of
the bishops became otherwise amply endowed, they were prohibited from
demanding their usual share of these tithes, and the division was into
three parts only. And hence it was inferred by the monasteries, that a
small part was sufficient for the officiating priest, and that the
remainder might well be applied to the use of their own fraternities,
(the endowment of which was construed to be a work of the most exalted
piety) subject to the burthen of repairing the church and providing
for it's constant supply. And therefore they begged and bought, for
masses and obits, and sometimes even for money, all the advowsons
within their reach, and then appropriated the benefices to the use of
their own corporation. But, in order to complete such appropriation
effectually, the king's licence, and consent of the bishop, must first
be obtained; because both the king and the bishop may sometime or
other have an interest, by lapse, in the presentation to the benefice;
which can never happen if it be appropriated to the use of a
corporation, which never dies: and also because the law reposes a
confidence in them, that they will not consent to any thing that shall
be to the prejudice of the church. The consent of the patron also is
necessarily implied, because (as was before observed) the
appropriation can be originally made to none, but to such spiritual
corporation, as is also the patron of the church; the whole being
indeed nothing else, but an allowance for the patrons to retain the
tithes and glebe in their own hands, without presenting any clerk,
they themselves undertaking to provide for the service of the
church[o]. When the appropriation is thus made, the appropriators and
their successors are perpetual parsons of the church; and must sue and
be sued, in all matters concerning the rights of the church, by the
name of parsons[p].

[Footnote n: Co. Litt. 300.]

[Footnote o: Plowd. 496-500.]

[Footnote p: Hob. 307.]

THIS appropriation may be severed, and the church become
disappropriate, two ways: as, first, if the patron or appropriator
presents a clerk, who is instituted and inducted to the parsonage:
for the incumbent so instituted and inducted is to all intents and
purposes complete parson; and the appropriation, being once severed,
can never be re-united again, unless by a repetition of the same
solemnities[q]. And when the clerk so presented is distinct from the
vicar, the rectory thus vested in him becomes what is called a
_sine-cure_; because he hath no cure of souls, having a vicar under
him to whom that cure is committed[r]. Also, if the corporation which
has the appropriation is dissolved, the parsonage becomes
disappropriate at common law; because the perpetuity of person is
gone, which is necessary to support the appropriation.

[Footnote q: Co. Litt. 46.]

[Footnote r: Sine-cures might also be created by other means. 2 Burn.
eccl. law. 347.]

IN this manner, and subject to these conditions, may appropriations be
made at this day: and thus were most, if not all, of the
appropriations at present existing originally made; being annexed to
bishopricks, prebends, religious houses, nay, even to nunneries, and
certain military orders, all of which were spiritual corporations. At
the dissolution of monasteries by statutes 27 Hen. VIII. c. 28. and 31
Hen. VIII. c. 13. the appropriations of the several parsonages, which
belonged to those respective religious houses, (amounting to more than
one third of all the parishes in England[s]) would have been by the
rules of the common law disappropriated; had not a clause in those
statutes intervened, to give them to the king in as ample a manner as
the abbots, &c, formerly held the same, at the time of their
dissolution. This, though perhaps scarcely defensible, was not without
example; for the same was done in former reigns, when the alien
priories, (that is, such as were filled by foreigners only) were
dissolved and given to the crown[t]. And from these two roots have
sprung all the lay appropriations or secular parsonages, which we now
see in the kingdom; they having been afterwards granted out from time
to time by the crown[u].

[Footnote s: Seld. review of tith. c. 9. Spelm. Apology. 35.]

[Footnote t: 2 Inst. 584.]

[Footnote u: Sir H. Spelman (of tythes, c. 29.) says these are now
called impropriations, as being _improperly_ in the hands of laymen.]

THESE appropriating corporations, or religious houses, were wont to
depute one of their own body to perform divine service, and administer
the sacraments, in those parishes of which the society was thus the
parson. This officiating minister was in reality no more than a
curate, deputy, or vicegerent of the appropriator, and therefore
called _vicarius_, or _vicar_. His stipend was at the discretion of
the appropriator, who was however bound of common right to find
somebody, _qui illi de temporalibus, episcopo de spiritualibus, debeat
respondere_[w]. But this was done in so scandalous a manner, and the
parishes suffered so much by the neglect of the appropriators, that
the legislature was forced to interpose: and accordingly it is enacted
by statute 15 Ric. II. c. 6. that in all appropriations of churches,
the diocesan bishop shall ordain (in proportion to the value of the
church) a competent sum to be distributed among the poor parishioners
annually; and that the vicarage shall be _sufficiently_ endowed. It
seems the parish were frequently sufferers, not only by the want of
divine service, but also by withholding those alms, for which, among
other purposes, the payment of tithes was originally imposed: and
therefore in this act a pension is directed to be distributed among
the poor parochians, as well as a sufficient stipend to the vicar. But
he, being liable to be removed at the pleasure of the appropriator,
was not likely to insist too rigidly on the legal sufficiency of the
stipend: and therefore by statute 4 Hen. IV. c. 12. it is ordained,
that the vicar shall be a secular person, not a member of any
religious house; that he shall be vicar perpetual, not removeable at
the caprice of the monastery; and that he shall be canonically
instituted and inducted, and be sufficiently endowed, at the
discretion of the ordinary, for these three express purposes, to do
divine service, to inform the people, and to keep hospitality. The
endowments in consequence of these statutes have usually been by a
portion of the glebe, or land, belonging to the parsonage, and a
particular share of the tithes, which the appropriators found it most
troublesome to collect, and which are therefore generally called
privy, small, or vicarial, tithes; the greater, or predial, tithes
being still referred to their own use. But one and the same rule was
not observed in the endowment of all vicarages. Hence some are more
liberally, and some more scantily, endowed; and hence many things, as
wood in particular, is in some countries a predial, and in some a
vicarial tithe.

[Footnote w: Seld. tith. c. 11. 1.]

THE distinction therefore of a parson and vicar is this; that the
parson has for the most part the whole right to all the ecclesiastical
dues in his parish; but a vicar has generally an appropriator over
him, entitled to the best part of the profits, to whom he is in effect
perpetual curate, with a standing salary. Though in some places the
vicarage has been considerably augmented by a large share of the great
tithes; which augmentations were greatly assisted by the statute 29
Car. II. c. 8. enacted in favour of poor vicars and curates, which
rendered such temporary augmentations (when made by the appropriators)
perpetual.

THE method of becoming a parson or vicar is much the same. To both
there are four requisites necessary: holy orders; presentation;
institution; and induction. The method of conferring the holy orders
of deacon and priest, according to the liturgy and canons[x], is
foreign to the purpose of these commentaries; any farther than as they
are necessary requisites to make a complete parson or vicar. By common
law a deacon, of any age, might be instituted and inducted to a
parsonage or vicarage: but it was ordained by statute 13 Eliz. c. 12.
that no person under twenty three years of age, and in deacon's
orders, should be presented to any benefice with cure; and if he were
not ordained priest within one year after his induction, he should be
_ipso facto_ deprived: and now, by statute 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 4. no
person is capable to be admitted to any benefice, unless he hath been
first ordained a priest; and then he is, in the language of the law, a
clerk in orders. But if he obtains orders, or a licence to preach, by
money or corrupt practices (which seems to be the true, though not the
common notion of simony) the person giving such orders forfeits[y]
40_l._ and the person receiving 10_l._ and is incapable of any
ecclesiastical preferment for seven years afterwards.

[Footnote x: See 2 Burn. eccl. law. 103.]

[Footnote y: Stat. 31 Eliz. c. 6.]

ANY clerk may be presented[z] to a parsonage or vicarage; that is, the
patron, to whom the advowson of the church belongs, may offer his
clerk to the bishop of the diocese to be instituted. Of advowsons, or
the right of presentation, being a species of private property, we
shall find a more convenient place to treat in the second part of
these commentaries. But when a clerk is presented, the bishop may
refuse him upon many accounts. As, 1. If the patron is excommunicated,
and remains in contempt forty days[a]. Or, 2. If the clerk be
unfit[b]: which unfitness is of several kinds. First, with regard to
his person; as if he be a bastard, an outlaw, an excommunicate, an
alien, under age, or the like[c]. Next, with regard to his faith or
morals; as for any particular heresy, or vice that is _malum in se_:
but if the bishop alleges only in generals, as that he is
_schismaticus inveteratus_, or objects a fault that is _malum
prohibitum_ merely, as haunting taverns, playing at unlawful games, or
the like; it is not good cause of refusal[d]. Or, lastly, the clerk
may be unfit to discharge the pastoral office for want of learning. In
any of which cases the bishop may refuse the clerk. In case the
refusal is for heresy, schism, inability of learning, or other matter
of ecclesiastical cognizance, there the bishop must give notice to the
patron of such his cause of refusal, who, being usually a layman, is
not supposed to have knowlege of it; else he cannot present by lapse:
but if the cause be temporal, there he is not bound to give notice[e].

[Footnote z: A layman may also be presented; but he must take priests
orders before his admission. 1 Burn. 103.]

[Footnote a: 2 Roll. Abr. 355.]

[Footnote b: Glanv. _l._ 13. _c._ 20.]

[Footnote c: 2 Roll. Abr. 356. 2 Inst. 632. Stat. 3 Ric. II. c. 3. 7
Ric. II. c. 12.]

[Footnote d: 5 Rep. 58.]

[Footnote e: 2 Inst. 632.]

IF an action at law be brought by the patron against the bishop, for
refusing his clerk, the bishop must assign the cause. If the cause be
of a temporal nature and the fact admitted, (as, for instance,
outlawry) the judges of the king's courts must determine it's
validity, or, whether it be sufficient cause of refusal: but if the
fact be denied, it must be determined by a jury. If the cause be of a
spiritual nature, (as, heresy, particularly alleged) the fact if
denied shall also be determined by a jury; and if the fact be admitted
or found, the court upon consultation and advice of learned divines
shall decide it's sufficiency[f]. If the cause be want of learning,
the bishop need not specify in what points the clerk is deficient, but
only allege that he _is_ deficient[g]: for the statute 9 Edw. II. st.
1. c. 13. is express, that the examination of the fitness of a person
presented to a benefice belongs to the ecclesiastical judge. But
because it would be nugatory in this case to demand the reason of
refusal from the ordinary, if the patron were bound to abide by his
determination, who has already pronounced his clerk unfit; therefore
if the bishop returns the clerk to be _minus sufficiens in
literatura_, the court shall write to the metropolitan, to reexamine
him, and certify his qualifications; which certificate of the
arch-bishop is final[h].

[Footnote f: 2 Inst. 632.]

[Footnote g: 5 Rep. 58. 3 Lev. 313.]

[Footnote h: 2 Inst. 632.]

IF the bishop hath no objections, but admits the patron's
presentation, the clerk so admitted is next to be instituted by him;
which is a kind of investiture of the spiritual part of the benefice:
for by institution the care of the souls of the parish is committed to
the charge of the clerk. When a vicar is instituted, he (besides the
usual forms) takes, if required by the bishop, an oath of perpetual
residence; for the maxim of law is, that _vicarius non habet
vicarium_: and as the non-residence of the appropriators was the cause
of the perpetual establishment of vicarages, the law judges it very
improper for them to defeat the end of their constitution, and by
absence to create the very mischiefs which they were appointed to
remedy: especially as, if any profits are to arise from putting in a
curate and living at a distance from the parish, the appropriator, who
is the real parson, has undoubtedly the elder title to them. When the
ordinary is also the patron, and _confers_ the living, the
presentation and institution are one and the same act, and are called
a collation to a benefice. By institution or collation the church is
full, so that there can be no fresh presentation till another vacancy,
at least in the case of a common patron; but the church is not full
against the king, till induction: nay, even if a clerk is instituted
upon the king's presentation, the crown may revoke it before
induction, and present another clerk[i]. Upon institution also the
clerk may enter on the parsonage house and glebe, and take the tithes;
but he cannot grant or let them, or bring any action for them, till
induction.

[Footnote i: Co. Litt. 344.]

INDUCTION is performed by a mandate from the bishop to the
arch-deacon, who usually issues out a precept to other clergymen to
perform it for him. It is done by giving the clerk corporal possession
of the church, as by holding the ring of the door, tolling a bell, or
the like; and is a form required by law, with intent to give all the
parishioners due notice, and sufficient certainty of their new
minister, to whom their tithes are to be paid. This therefore is the
investiture of the temporal part of the benefice, as institution is of
the spiritual. And when a clerk is thus presented, instituted, and
inducted into a rectory, he is then, and not before, in full and
complete possession, and is called in law _persona impersonata_, or
parson imparsonee[k].

[Footnote k: Co. Litt. 300.]

THE rights of a parson or vicar, in his tithes and ecclesiastical
dues, fall more properly under the second book of these commentaries:
and as to his duties, they are principally of ecclesiastical
cognizance; those only excepted which are laid upon him by statute.
And those are indeed so numerous that it is impracticable to recite
them here with any tolerable conciseness or accuracy. Some of them we
may remark, as they arise in the progress of our enquiries, but for
the rest I must refer myself to such authors as have compiled
treatises expressly upon this subject[l]. I shall only just mention
the article of residence, upon the supposition of which the law doth
stile every parochial minister an incumbent. By statute 21 Hen. VIII.
c. 13. persons wilfully absenting themselves from their benefices, for
one month together, or two months in the year, incur a penalty of
5_l._ to the king, and 5_l._ to any person that will sue for the same:
except chaplains to the king, or others therein mentioned[m], during
their attendance in the houshold of such as retain them: and also
except[n] all heads of houses, magistrates, and professors in the
universities, and all students under forty years of age residing
there, _bona fide_, for study. Legal residence is not only in the
parish, but also in the parsonage house: for it hath been resolved[o],
that the statute intended residence, not only for serving the cure,
and for hospitality; but also for maintaining the house, that the
successor also may keep hospitality there.

[Footnote l: These are very numerous: but there are only two, which
can be relied on with any degree of certainty; bishop Gibson's
_codex_, and Dr Burn's ecclesiastical law.]

[Footnote m: Stat. 25 Hen. VIII. c. 16. 33 Hen. VIII. c. 28.]

[Footnote n: Stat. 28 Hen. VIII. c. 13.]

[Footnote o: 6 Rep. 21.]

WE have seen that there is but one way, whereby one may become a
parson or vicar: there are many ways, by which one may cease to be so.
1. By death. 2. By cession, in taking another benefice. For by statute
21 Hen. VIII. c. 13. if any one having a benefice of 8_l._ _per
annum_, or upwards, in the king's books, (according to the present
valuation[p],) accepts any other, the first shall be adjudged void;
unless he obtains a dispensation; which no one is entitled to have,
but the chaplains of the king and others therein mentioned, the
brethren and sons of lords and knights, and doctors and bachelors of
divinity and law, _admitted by the universities_ of this realm. And a
vacancy thus made, for want of a dispensation, is called cession. 3.
By consecration; for, as was mentioned before, when a clerk is
promoted to a bishoprick, all his other preferments are void the
instant that he is consecrated. But there is a method, by the favour
of the crown, of holding such livings _in commendam_. _Commenda_, or
_ecclesia commendata_, is a living commended by the crown to the care
of a clerk, to hold till a proper pastor is provided for it. This may
be temporary, for one, two, or three years, or perpetual; being a kind
of dispensation to avoid the vacancy of the living, and is called a
_commenda retinere_. There is also a _commenda recipere_, which is to
take a benefice _de novo_, in the bishop's own gift, or the gift of
some other patron consenting to the same; and this is the same to him
as institution and induction are to another clerk[q]. 4. By
resignation. But this is of no avail, till accepted by the ordinary;
into whose hands the resignation must be made[r]. 5. By deprivation,
either by canonical censures, of which I am not to speak; or in
pursuance of divers penal statutes, which declare the benefice void,
for some nonfeasance or neglect, or else some malefeasance or crime.
As, for simony[s]; for maintaining any doctrine in derogation of the
king's supremacy, or of the thirty nine articles, or of the book of
common-prayer[t]; for neglecting after institution to read the
articles in the church, or make the declarations against popery, or
take the abjuration oath[u]; for using any other form of prayer than
the liturgy of the church of England[w]; or for absenting himself
sixty days in one year from a benefice belonging to a popish patron,
to which the clerk was presented by either of the universities[x]; in
all which and similar cases[y] the benefice is _ipso facto_ void,
without any formal sentence of deprivation.

[Footnote p: Cro. Car. 456.]

[Footnote q: Hob. 144.]

[Footnote r: Cro. Jac. 198.]

[Footnote s: Stat. 31 Eliz. c. 6. and 12 Ann. c. 12.]

[Footnote t: Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 1 & 2. and 13 Eliz. c. 12.]

[Footnote u: Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 12. 14 Car. II. c. 4. and 1 Geo. I. c.
6.]

[Footnote w: Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 2.]

[Footnote x: Stat. 1 W. & M. c. 26.]

[Footnote y: 6 Rep. 29, 30.]

VI. A CURATE is the lowest degree in the church; being in the same
state that a vicar was formerly, an officiating temporary minister,
instead of the real incumbent. Though there are what are called
_perpetual_ curacies, where all the tithes are appropriated, and no
vicarage endowed, (being for some particular reasons[z] exempted from
the statute of Hen. IV) but, instead thereof, such perpetual curate is
appointed by the appropriator. With regard to the other species of
curates, they are the objects of some particular statutes, which
ordain, that such as serve a church during it's vacancy shall be paid
such stipend as the ordinary thinks reasonable, out of the profits of
the vacancy; or, if that be not sufficient, by the successor within
fourteen days after he takes possession[a]: and that, if any rector or
vicar nominates a curate to the ordinary to be licenced, the ordinary
shall settle his stipend under his hand and seal, not exceeding 50_l._
_per annum_, nor less than 20_l._ and on failure of payment may
sequester the profits of the benefice[b].

[Footnote z: 1 Burn. eccl. law. 427.]

[Footnote a: Stat. 28 Hen. VIII. c. 11.]

[Footnote b: Stat. 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 12.]

THUS much of the clergy, properly so called. There are also certain
inferior ecclesiastical officers of whom the common law takes notice;
and that, principally, to assist the ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
where it is deficient in powers. On which officers I shall make a few
cursory remarks.

VII. CHURCHWARDENS are the guardians or keepers of the church, and
representatives of the body of the parish[c]. They are sometimes
appointed by the minister, sometimes by the parish, sometimes by both
together, as custom directs. They are taken, in favour of the church,
to be for some purposes a kind of corporation at the common law; that
is, they are enabled by that name to have a property in goods and
chattels, and to bring actions for them, for the use and profit of the
parish. Yet they may not waste the church goods, but may be removed by
the parish, and then called to account by action at the common law:
but there is no method of calling them to account, but by first
removing them; for none can legally do it, but those who are put in
their place. As to lands, or other real property, as the church,
church-yard, &c, they have no sort of interest therein; but if any
damage is done thereto, the parson only or vicar shall have the
action. Their office also is to repair the church, and make rates and
levies for that purpose: but these are recoverable only in the
ecclesiastical court. They are also joined with the overseers in the
care and maintenance of the poor. They are to levy[d] a shilling
forfeiture on all such as do not repair to church on sundays and
holidays, and are empowered to keep all persons orderly while there;
to which end it has been held that a churchwarden may justify the
pulling off a man's hat, without being guilty of either an assault or
trespass[e]. There are also a multitude of other petty parochial
powers committed to their charge by divers acts of parliament[f].

[Footnote c: In Sweden they have similar officers, whom they call
_kiorckiowariandes_. Stiernhook. l. 3. c. 7.]

[Footnote d: Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 2.]

[Footnote e: 1 Lev. 196.]

[Footnote f: See Lambard of churchwardens, at the end of his
_eirenarcha_; and Dr Burn, tit. _church, churchwardens, visitation_.]

VIII. PARISH clerks and sextons are also regarded by the common law,
as persons who have freeholds in their offices; and therefore though
they may be punished, yet they cannot be deprived, by ecclesiastical
censures[g]. The parish clerk was formerly always in holy orders; and
some are so to this day. He is generally appointed by the incumbent,
but by custom may be chosen by the inhabitants; and if such custom
appears, the court of king's bench will grant a _mandamus_ to the
arch-deacon to swear him in, for the establishment of the custom turns
it into a temporal or civil right[h].

[Footnote g: 2 Roll. Abr. 234.]

[Footnote h: Cro. Car. 589.]




CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.

OF THE CIVIL STATE.


THE lay part of his majesty's subjects, or such of the people as are
not comprehended under the denomination of clergy, may be divided into
three distinct states, the civil, the military, and the maritime.

THAT part of the nation which falls under our first and most
comprehensive division, the civil state, includes all orders of men,
from the highest nobleman to the meanest peasant; that are not
included under either our former division, of clergy, or under one of
the two latter, the military and maritime states: and it may sometimes
include individuals of the other three orders; since a nobleman, a
knight, a gentleman, or a peasant, may become either a divine, a
soldier, or a seaman.

THE civil state consists of the nobility and the commonalty. Of the
nobility, the peerage of Great Britain, or lords temporal, as forming
(together with the bishops) one of the supreme branches of the
legislature, I have before sufficiently spoken: we are here to
consider them according to their several degrees, or titles of
honour.

ALL degrees of nobility and honour are derived from the king as their
fountain[a]: and he may institute what new titles he pleases. Hence it
is that all degrees of honour are not of equal antiquity. Those now in
use are dukes, marquesses, earls, viscounts, and barons[b].

[Footnote a: 4 Inst. 363.]

[Footnote b: For the original of these titles on the continent of
Europe, and their subsequent introduction into this island, see Mr
Selden's _titles of honour_.]

1. A _duke_, though it be with us, as a mere title of nobility,
inferior in point of antiquity to many others, yet it is superior to
all of them in rank; being the first title of dignity after the royal
family[c]. Among the Saxons the Latin name of dukes, _duces_, is very
frequent, and signified, as among the Romans, the commanders or
leaders of their armies, whom in their own language they called
[Anglo-Saxon: heretoga][d]; and in the laws of Henry I (as translated
by Lambard) we find them called _heretochii_. But after the Norman
conquest, which changed the military polity of the nation, the kings
themselves continuing for many generations _dukes_ of Normandy, they
would not honour any subjects with that title, till the time of Edward
III; who, claiming to be king of France, and thereby losing the ducal
in the royal dignity, in the eleventh year of his reign created his
son, Edward the black prince, duke of Cornwall: and many, of the royal
family especially, were afterwards raised to the same honour. However,
in the reign of queen Elizabeth, _A.D._ 1572[e], the whole order
became utterly extinct: but it was revived about fifty years
afterwards by her successor, who was remarkably prodigal of honours,
in the person of George Villiers duke of Buckingham.

[Footnote c: Camden. Britan. _tit. ordines_.]

[Footnote d: This is apparently derived from the same root as the
German [Fraktur: hertzogen], the antient appellation of dukes in that
country. Seld. tit. hon. 2. 1. 22.]

[Footnote e: Camden. Britan. _tit. ordines_. Spelman. _Gloss._ 191.]

2. A _marquess_, _marchio_, is the next degree of nobility. His office
formerly was (for dignity and duty were never separated by our
ancestors) to guard the frontiers and limits of the kingdom; which
were called the marches, from the teutonic word, _marche_, a limit:
as, in particular, were the marches of Wales and Scotland, while they
continued to be enemies countries. The persons who had command there,
were called lords marchers, or marquesses; whose authority was
abolished by statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 27: though the title had long
before been made a mere ensign of honour; Robert Vere, earl of Oxford,
being created marquess of Dublin, by Richard II in the eighth year of
his reign[f].

[Footnote f: 2 Inst. 5.]

3. AN _earl_ is a title of nobility so antient, that it's original
cannot clearly be traced out. Thus much seems tolerably certain: that
among the Saxons they were called _ealdormen_, _quasi_ elder men,
signifying the same as _senior_ or _senator_ among the Romans; and
also _schiremen_, because they had each of them the civil government
of a several division or shire. On the irruption of the Danes, they
changed the name to _eorles_, which, according to Camden[g], signified
the same in their language. In Latin they are called _comites_ (a
title first used in the empire) from being the king's attendants; "_a
societate nomen sumpserunt, reges enim tales sibi associant_[h]."
After the Norman conquest they were for some time called _counts_, or
_countees_, from the French; but they did not long retain that name
themselves, though their shires are from thence called counties to
this day. It is now become a mere title, they having nothing to do
with the government of the county; which, as has been more than once
observed, is now entirely devolved on the sheriff, the earl's deputy,
or _vice-comes_. In all writs, and commissions, and other formal
instruments, the king, when he mentions any peer of the degree of an
earl, always stiles him "trusty and well beloved _cousin_:" an
appellation as antient as the reign of Henry IV; who being either by
his wife, his mother, or his sisters, actually related or allied to
every earl in the kingdom, artfully and constantly acknowleged that
connexion in all his letters and other public acts; from whence the
usage has descended to his successors, though the reason has long ago
failed.

[Footnote g: _Ibid._]

[Footnote h: Bracton. _l._ 1. _c._ 8. Fleta. _l._ i. _c._ 5.]

4. THE name of _vice-comes_ or _viscount_ was afterwards made use of
as an arbitrary title of honour, without any shadow of office
pertaining to it, by Henry the sixth; when in the eighteenth year of
his reign, he created John Beaumont a peer, by the name of viscount
Beaumont, which was the first instance of the kind[i].

[Footnote i: 2 Inst. 5.]

5. A _baron_'s is the most general and universal title of nobility;
for originally every one of the peers of superior rank had also a
barony annexed to his other titles[k]. But it hath sometimes happened
that, when an antient baron hath been raised to a new degree of
peerage, in the course of a few generations the two titles have
descended differently; one perhaps to the male descendants, the other
to the heirs general; whereby the earldom or other superior title hath
subsisted without a barony: and there are also modern instances where
earls and viscounts have been created without annexing a barony to
their other honours: so that now the rule does not hold universally,
that all peers are barons. The original and antiquity of baronies has
occasioned great enquiries among our English antiquarians. The most
probable opinion seems to be, that they were the same with our present
lords of manors; to which the name of court baron, (which is the
lord's court, and incident to every manor) gives some countenance. It
may be collected from king John's _magna carta_[l], that originally
all lords of manors, or barons, that held of the king _in capite_, had
seats in the great council or parliament, till about the reign of that
prince the conflux of them became so large and troublesome, that the
king was obliged to divide them, and summon only the greater barons in
person; leaving the small ones to be summoned by the sheriff, and (as
it is said) to sit by representation in another house; which gave rise
to the separation of the two houses of parliament[m]. By degrees the
title came to be confined to the greater barons, or lords of
parliament only; and there were no other barons among the peerage but
such as were summoned by writ, in respect of the tenure of their lands
or baronies, till Richard the second first made it a mere title of
honor, by conferring it on divers persons by his letters patent[n].

[Footnote k: 2 Inst. 5, 6.]

[Footnote l: _cap._ 14.]

[Footnote m: Gilb. hist. exch. c. 3. Seld. tit. of hon. 2. 5. 21.]

[Footnote n: 1 Inst. 9. Seld. _Jan. Angl._ 2. §. 66.]

HAVING made this short enquiry into the original of our several
degrees of nobility, I shall next consider the manner in which they
may be created. The right of peerage seems to have been originally
territorial; that is, annexed to lands, honors, castles, manors, and
the like, the proprietors and possessors of which were (in right of
those estates) allowed to be peers of the realm, and were summoned to
parliament to do suit and service to their sovereign: and, when the
land was alienated, the dignity passed with it as appendant. Thus the
bishops still sit in the house of lords in right of succession to
certain antient baronies annexed, or supposed to be annexed, to their
episcopal lands[o]: and thus, in 11 Hen. VI, the possession of the
castle of Arundel was adjudged to confer an earldom on it's
possessor[p]. But afterwards, when alienations grew to be frequent,
the dignity of peerage was confined to the lineage of the party
ennobled, and instead of territorial became personal. Actual proof of
a tenure by barony became no longer necessary to constitute a lord of
parliament; but the record of the writ of summons to them or their
ancestors was admitted as a sufficient evidence of the tenure.

[Footnote o: Glanv. _l._ 7. _c._ 1.]

[Footnote p: Seld. tit. of hon. b. 2. c. 9. §. 5.]

PEERS are now created either by writ, or by patent: for those who
claim by prescription must suppose either a writ or patent made to
their ancestors; though by length of time it is lost. The creation by
writ, or the king's letter, is a summons to attend the house of peers,
by the stile and title of that barony, which the king is pleased to
confer: that by patent is a royal grant to a subject of any dignity
and degree of peerage. The creation by writ is the more antient way;
but a man is not ennobled thereby, unless he actually takes his seat
in the house of lords: and therefore the most usual, because the
surest, way is to grant the dignity by patent, which enures to a man
and his heirs according to the limitations thereof, though he never
himself makes use of it[q]. Yet it is frequent to call up the eldest
son of a peer to the house of lords by writ of summons, in the name of
his father's barony: because in that case there is no danger of his
children's losing the nobility in case he never takes his seat; for
they will succeed to their grand-father. Creation by writ has also one
advantage over that by patent: for a person created by writ holds the
dignity to him _and his heirs_, without any words to that purport in
the writ; but in letters patent there must be words to direct the
inheritance, else the dignity enures only to the grantee for life[r].
For a man or woman may be created noble for their own lives, and the
dignity not descend to their heirs at all, or descend only to some
particular heirs: as where a peerage is limited to a man, and the
heirs male of his body by Elizabeth his present lady, and not to such
heirs by any former or future wife.

[Footnote q: Co. Litt. 16.]

[Footnote r: Co. Litt. 9. 16.]

LET us next take a view of a few of the principal incidents attending
the nobility, exclusive of their capacity as members of parliament,
and as hereditary counsellors of the crown; both of which we have
before considered. And first we must observe, that in criminal cases,
a nobleman shall be tried by his peers. The great are always obnoxious
to popular envy: were they to be judged by the people, they might be
in danger from the prejudice of their judges; and would moreover be
deprived of the privilege of the meanest subjects, that of being tried
by their equals, which is secured to all the realm by _magna carta_,
c. 29. It is said, that this does not extend to bishops; who, though
they are lords of parliament, and sit there by virtue of their
baronies which they hold _jure ecclesiae_, yet are not ennobled in
blood, and consequently not peers with the nobility[s]. As to
peeresses, no provision was made for their trial when accused of
treason or felony, till after Eleanor dutchess of Gloucester, wife to
the lord protector, had been accused of treason and found guilty of
witchcraft, in an ecclesiastical synod, through the intrigues of
cardinal Beaufort. This very extraordinary trial gave occasion to a
special statute, 20 Hen. VI. c. 9. which enacts that peeresses either
in their own right, or by marriage, shall be tried before the same
judicature as peers of the realm. If a woman, noble in her own right,
marries a commoner, she still remains noble, and shall be tried by her
peers: but if she be only noble by marriage, then by a second
marriage, with a commoner, she loses her dignity; for as by marriage
it is gained, by marriage it is also lost. Yet if a duchess dowager
marries a baron, she continues a duchess still; for all the nobility
are _pares_, and therefore it is no degradation[t]. A peer, or peeress
(either in her own right or by marriage) cannot be arrested in civil
cases[u]: and they have also many peculiar privileges annexed to their
peerage in the course of judicial proceedings. A peer, sitting in
judgment, gives not his verdict upon oath, like an ordinary juryman,
but upon his honour[w]: he answers also to bills in chancery upon his
honour, and not upon his oath[x]; but, when he is examined as a
witness either in civil or criminal cases, he must be sworn[y]: for
the respect, which the law shews to the honour of a peer, does not
extend so far as to overturn a settled maxim, that _in judicio non
creditur nisi juratis_[z]. The honour of peers is however so highly
tendered by the law, that it is much more penal to spread false
reports of them, and certain other great officers of the realm, than
of other men: scandal against them being called by the peculiar name
of _scandalum magnatum_; and subjected to peculiar punishment by
divers antient statutes[a].

[Footnote s: 3 Inst. 30, 31.]

[Footnote t: 2 Inst. 50.]

[Footnote u: Finch. L. 355. 1 Ventr. 298.]

[Footnote w: 2 Inst 49.]

[Footnote x: 1 P. Wms. 146.]

[Footnote y: Salk. 512.]

[Footnote z: Cro. Car. 64.]

[Footnote a: 3 Edw. I. c. 34. 2 Ric. II. st. 1. c. 5. 12 Ric. II. c.
11.]

A PEER cannot lose his nobility, but by death or attainder; hough
[Transcriber's Note: though] there was an instance, in the reign of
Edward the fourth, of the degradation of George Nevile duke of
Bedford by act of parliament[b], on account of his poverty, which
rendered him unable to support his dignity[c]. But this is a singular
instance: which serves at the same time, by having happened, to shew
the power of parliament; and, by having happened but once, to shew how
tender the parliament hath been, in exerting so high a power. It hath
been said indeed[d], that if a baron waste his estate, so that he is
not able to support the degree, the _king_ may degrade him: but it is
expressly held by later authorities[e], that a peer cannot be degraded
but by act of _parliament_.

[Footnote b: 4 Inst. 355.]

[Footnote c: The preamble to the act is remarkable: "forasmuch as
oftentimes it is seen, that when any lord is called to high estate,
and hath not convenient livelyhood to support the same dignity, it
induceth great poverty and indigence, and causeth oftentimes great
extortion, embracery, and maintenance to be had; to the great trouble
of all such countries where such estate shall happen to be: therefore,
&c."]

[Footnote d: By lord chancellor Ellesmere. Moor. 678.]

[Footnote e: 12 Rep. 107. 12 Mod. 56.]

THE commonalty, like the nobility, are divided into several degrees;
and, as the lords, though different in rank, yet all of them are peers
in respect of their nobility, so the commoners, though some are
greatly superior to others, yet all are in law peers, in respect of
their want of nobility[f].

[Footnote f: 2 Inst. 29.]

THE first name of dignity, next beneath a peer, was anciently that of
_vidames_, _vice domini_, or _valvasors_[g]: who are mentioned by our
antient lawyers[h] as _viri magnae dignitatis_; and sir Edward Coke[i]
speaks highly of them. Yet they are now quite out of use; and our
legal antiquarians are not so much as agreed upon their original or
ancient office.

[Footnote g: Camden. _ibid._]

[Footnote h: Bracton. _l._ 1. _c._ 8.]

[Footnote i: 2 Inst. 667.]

NOW therefore the first dignity after the nobility, is a _knight_ of
the order of St. George, or _of the garter_; first instituted by
Edward III, _A.D._ 1344[k]. Next follows a _knight banneret_; who
indeed by statutes 5 Ric. II. st. 2. c. 4. and 14 Ric. II. c. 11. is
ranked next after barons: and that precedence was confirmed to him by
order of king James I, in the tenth year of his reign[l]. But, in
order to intitle himself to this rank, he must have been created by
the king in person, in the field, under the royal banners, in time of
open war[m]. Else he ranks after _baronets_; who are the next order:
which title is a dignity of inheritance, created by letters patent,
and usually descendible to the issue male. It was first instituted by
king James the first, _A.D._ 1611. in order to raise a competent sum
for the reduction of the province of Ulster in Ireland; for which
reason all baronets have the arms of Ulster superadded to their family
coat. Next follow _knights of the bath_; an order instituted by king
Henry IV, and revived by king George the first. They are so called
from the ceremony of bathing, the night before their creation. The
last of these inferior nobility are _knights bachelors_; the most
antient, though the lowest, order of knighthood amongst us: for we
have an instance[n] of king Alfred's conferring this order on his son
Athelstan. The custom of the antient Germans was to give their young
men a shield and a lance in the great council: this was equivalent to
the _toga virilis_ of the Romans: before this they were not permitted
to bear arms, but were accounted as part of the father's houshold;
after it, as part of the public[o]. Hence some derive the usage of
knighting, which has prevailed all over the western world, since it's
reduction by colonies from those northern heroes. Knights are called
in Latin _equites aurati_; _aurati_, from the gilt spurs they wore;
and _equites_, because they always served on horseback: for it is
observable[p], that almost all nations call their knights by some
appellation derived from an horse. They are also called in our law
_milites_, because they formed a part, or indeed the whole of the
royal army, in virtue of their feodal tenures; one condition of which
was, that every one who held a knights fee (which in Henry the
second's time[q] amounted to 20_l._ _per annum_) was obliged to be
knighted, and attend the king in his wars, or fine for his
non-compliance. The exertion of this prerogative, as an expedient to
raise money in the reign of Charles the first, gave great offence;
though warranted by law, and the recent example of queen Elizabeth:
but it was, at the restoration, together with all other military
branches of the feodal law, abolished; and this kind of knighthood
has, since that time, fallen into great disregard.

[Footnote k: Seld. tit. of hon. 2. 5. 41.]

[Footnote l: Seld. tit. hon. 2. 11. 3.]

[Footnote m: 4 Inst. 6.]

[Footnote n: Will. Malmsb. _lib._ 2.]

[Footnote o: Tac. _de morib. Germ._ 13.]

[Footnote p: Camden. _ibid._ Co. Litt. 74.]

[Footnote q: Glanvil. _l._ 9. _c._ 4.]

THESE, sir Edward Coke says[r], are all the names of _dignity_ in this
kingdom, esquires and gentlemen being only names of _worship_. But
before these last the heralds rank all colonels, serjeants at law, and
doctors in the three learned professions.

[Footnote r: 2 Inst. 667.]

ESQUIRES and gentlemen are confounded together by sir Edward Coke, who
observes[s], that every esquire is a gentleman, and a gentleman is
defined to be one _qui arma gerit_, who bears coat armour, the grant
of which adds gentility to a man's family: in like manner as civil
nobility, among the Romans, was founded in the _jus imaginum_, or
having the image of one ancestor at least, who had borne some curule
office. It is indeed a matter somewhat unsettled, what constitutes the
distinction, or who is a real _esquire_: for it is not an estate,
however large, that confers this rank upon it's owner. Camden, who was
himself a herald, distinguishes them the most accurately; and he
reckons up four sorts of them[t]: 1. The eldest sons of knights, and
their eldest sons, in perpetual succession[u]. 2. The younger sons of
peers, and their eldest sons, in like perpetual succession: both which
species of esquires sir H. Spelman entitles _armigeri natalitii_[w].
3. Esquires created by the king's letters patent, or other
investiture; and their eldest sons. 4. Esquires by virtue of their
offices; as justices of the peace, and others who bear any office of
trust under the crown. To these may be added the esquires of knights
of the bath, each of whom constitutes three at his installation; and
all foreign, nay, Irish peers; and the eldest sons of peers of Great
Britain, who, though generally titular lords, are only esquires in the
law, and must so be named in all legal proceedings[x]. As for
_gentlemen_, says sir Thomas Smith[y], they be made good cheap in this
kingdom: for whosoever studieth the laws of the realm, who studieth in
the universities, who professeth liberal sciences, and (to be short)
who can live idly, and without manual labour, and will bear the port,
charge, and countenance of a gentleman, he shall be called master, and
shall be taken for a gentleman. A _yeoman_ is he that hath free land
of forty shillings by the year; who is thereby qualified to serve on
juries, vote for knights of the shire, and do any other act, where the
law requires one that is _probus et legalis homo_[z].

[Footnote s: 2 Inst. 668.]

[Footnote t: _Ibid._]

[Footnote u: 2 Inst. 667.]

[Footnote w: Gloss. 43.]

[Footnote x: 3 Inst. 30. 2 Inst. 667.]

[Footnote y: Commonw. of Eng. book 1. c. 20.]

[Footnote z: 2 Inst. 668.]

THE rest of the commonalty are _tradesmen_, _artificers_, and
_labourers_; who (as well as all others) must in pursuance of the
statute 1 Hen. V. c. 5. be stiled by the name and addition of their
estate, degree, or mystery, in all actions and other legal
proceedings.




CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.

OF THE MILITARY AND MARITIME STATES.


THE military state includes the whole of the soldiery; or, such
persons as are peculiarly appointed among the rest of the people, for
the safeguard and defence of the realm.

IN a land of liberty it is extremely dangerous to make a distinct
order of the profession of arms. In absolute monarchies this is
necessary for the safety of the prince, and arises from the main
principle of their constitution, which is that of governing by fear:
but in free states the profession of a soldier, taken singly and
merely as a profession, is justly an object of jealousy. In these no
man should take up arms, but with a view to defend his country and
it's laws: he puts not off the citizen when he enters the camp; but it
is because he is a citizen, and would wish to continue so, that he
makes himself for a while a soldier. The laws therefore and
constitution of these kingdoms know no such state as that of a
perpetual standing soldier, bred up to no other profession than that
of war: and it was not till the reign of Henry VII, that the kings of
England had so much as a guard about their persons.

IN the time of our Saxon ancestors, as appears from Edward the
confessor's laws[a], the military force of this kingdom was in the
hands of the dukes or heretochs, who were constituted through every
province and county in the kingdom; being taken out of the principal
nobility, and such as were most remarkable for being "_sapientes,
fideles, et animosi_." Their duty was to lead and regulate the English
armies, with a very unlimited power; "_prout eis visum fuerit, ad
honorem coronae et utilitatem regni_." And because of this great power
they were elected by the people in their full assembly, or folkmote,
in the same manner as sheriffs were elected: following still that old
fundamental maxim of the Saxon constitution, that where any officer
was entrusted with such power, as if abused might tend to the
oppression of the people, that power was delegated to him by the vote
of the people themselves[b]. So too, among the antient Germans, the
ancestors of our Saxon forefathers, they had their dukes, as well as
kings, with an independent power over the military, as the kings had
over the civil state. The dukes were elective, the kings hereditary:
for so only can be consistently understood that passage of Tacitus[c],
"_reges ex nobilitate, duces ex virtute sumunt_;" in constituting
their kings, the family, or blood royal, was regarded, in chusing
their dukes or leaders, warlike merit: just as Caesar relates of their
ancestors in his time, that whenever they went to war, by way either
of attack or defence, they _elected_ leaders to command them[d]. This
large share of power, thus conferred by the people, though intended to
preserve the liberty of the subject, was perhaps unreasonably
detrimental to the prerogative of the crown: and accordingly we find a
very ill use made of it by Edric duke of Mercia, in the reign of king
Edmond Ironside; who, by his office of duke or heretoch, was entitled
to a large command in the king's army, and by his repeated
treacheries at last transferred the crown to Canute the Dane.

[Footnote a: _c. de heretochiis._]

[Footnote b: "_Isti vero viri eliguntur per commune consilium, pro
communi utilitate regni, per provincias et patrias universas, et per
singulos comitatus, in pleno folkmote, sicut et vice-comites
provinciarum et comitatuum eligi debent._" _LL. Edw. Confess._ _ibid._
See also Bede, _eccl. hist._ _l._ 5. _c._ 10.]

[Footnote c: _De morib. German._ 7.]

[Footnote d: "_Quum bellum civitas aut illatum defendit, aut infert,
magistratus qui ei bello praesint deliguntur._" _De bell. Gall._ _l._
6. _c._ 22.]

IT seems universally agreed by all historians, that king Alfred first
settled a national militia in this kingdom, and by his prudent
discipline made all the subjects of his dominion soldiers: but we are
unfortunately left in the dark as to the particulars of this his so
celebrated regulation; though, from what was last observed, the dukes
seem to have been left in possession of too large and independent a
power: which enabled duke Harold on the death of Edward the confessor,
though a stranger to the royal blood, to mount for a short space the
throne of this kingdom, in prejudice of Edgar Atheling, the rightful
heir.

UPON the Norman conquest the feodal law was introduced here in all
it's rigor, the whole of which is built on a military plan. I shall
not now enter into the particulars of that constitution, which belongs
more properly to the next part of our commentaries: but shall only
observe, that, in consequence thereof, all the lands in the kingdom
were divided into what were called knight's fees, in number above
sixty thousand; and for every knight's fee a knight or soldier,
_miles_, was bound to attend the king in his wars, for forty days in a
year; in which space of time, before war was reduced to a science, the
campaign was generally finished, and a kingdom either conquered or
victorious[e]. By this means the king had, without any expense, an
army of sixty thousand men always ready at his command. And
accordingly we find one, among the laws of William the conqueror[f],
which in the king's name commands and firmly enjoins the personal
attendance of all knights and others; "_quod habeant et teneant se
semper in armis et equis, ut decet et oportet; et quod semper sint
prompti et parati ad servitium suum integrum nobis explendum et
peragendum, cum opus adfuerit, secundum quod debent de feodis et
tenementis suis de jure nobis facere_." This personal service in
process of time degenerated into pecuniary commutations or aids, and
at last the military part of the feodal system was abolished at the
restoration, by statute 12 Car. II. c. 24.

[Footnote e: The Poles are, even at this day, so tenacious of their
antient constitution, that their pospolite, or militia, cannot be
compelled to serve above six weeks, or forty days, in a year. Mod.
Univ. Hist. xxxiv. 12.]

[Footnote f: c. 58. See Co. Litt. 75, 76.]

IN the mean time we are not to imagine that the kingdom was left
wholly without defence, in case of domestic insurrections, or the
prospect of foreign invasions. Besides those, who by their military
tenures were bound to perform forty days service in the field, the
statute of Winchester[g] obliged every man, according to his estate
and degree, to provide a determinate quantity of such arms as were
then in use, in order to keep the peace: and constables were appointed
in all hundreds to see that such arms were provided. These weapons
were changed, by the statute 4 & 5 Ph. & M. c. 2. into others of more
modern service; but both this and the former provision were repealed
in the reign of James I[h]. While these continued in force, it was
usual from time to time for our princes to to [Transcriber's Note:
duplicate word] issue commissions of array, and send into every county
officers in whom they could confide, to muster and array (or set in
military order) the inhabitants of every district: and the form of the
commission of array was settled in parliament in the 5 Hen. IV[i]. But
at the same time it was provided[k], that no man should be compelled
to go out of the kingdom at any rate, nor out of his shire but in
cases of urgent necessity; nor should provide soldiers unless by
consent of parliament. About the reign of king Henry the eighth, and
his children, lord lieutenants began to be introduced, as standing
representatives of the crown, to keep the counties in military order;
for we find them mentioned as known officers in the statute 4 & 5 Ph.
& M. c. 3. though they had not been then long in use, for Camden
speaks of them[l], in the time of queen Elizabeth, as extraordinary
magistrates constituted only in times of difficulty and danger.

[Footnote g: 13 Edw. I. c. 6.]

[Footnote h: Stat. 1 Jac. I. c. 25. 21 Jac. I. c. 28.]

[Footnote i: Rushworth. part 3. pag. 667.]

[Footnote k: Stat. 1 Edw III. st. 2. c. 5 & 7. 25 Edw. III. st. 5. c.
8.]

[Footnote l: Brit. 103. Edit. 1594.]

IN this state things continued, till the repeal of the statutes of
armour in the reign of king James the first: after which, when king
Charles the first had, during his northern expeditions, issued
commissions of lieutenancy and exerted some military powers which,
having been long exercised, were thought to belong to the crown, it
became a question in the long parliament, how far the power of the
militia did inherently reside in the king; being now unsupported by
any statute, and founded only upon immemorial usage. This question,
long agitated with great heat and resentment on both sides, became at
length the immediate cause of the fatal rupture between the king and
his parliament: the two houses not only denying this prerogative of
the crown, the legality of which right perhaps might be somewhat
doubtful; but also seizing into their own hands the intire power of
the militia, the illegality of which step could never be any doubt at
all.

SOON after the restoration of king Charles the second, when the
military tenures were abolished, it was thought proper to ascertain
the power of the militia, to recognize the sole right of the crown to
govern and command them, and to put the whole into a more regular
method of military subordination[m]: and the order, in which the
militia now stands by law, is principally built upon the statutes
which were then enacted. It is true the two last of them are
apparently repealed; but many of their provisions are re-enacted, with
the addition of some new regulations, by the present militia laws: the
general scheme of which is to discipline a certain number of the
inhabitants of every county, chosen by lot for three years, and
officered by the lord lieutenant, the deputy lieutenants, and other
principal landholders, under a commission from the crown. They are not
compellable to march out of their counties, unless in case of invasion
or actual rebellion, nor in any case compellable to march out of the
kingdom. They are to be exercised at stated times: and their
discipline in general is liberal and [Transcriber's Note: 'and'
missing here but is in printer's mark on previous page] easy; but,
when drawn out into actual service, they are subject to the rigours of
martial law, as necessary to keep them in order. This is the
constitutional security, which our laws have provided for the public
peace, and for protecting the realm against foreign or domestic
violence; and which the statutes[n] declare is essentially necessary
to the safety and prosperity of the kingdom.

[Footnote m: 13 Car. II. c. 6. 14 Car. II. c. 3. 15 Car. II. c. 4.]

[Footnote n: 30 Geo. II. c. 25, &c.]

WHEN the nation is engaged in a foreign war, more veteran troops and
more regular discipline may perhaps be necessary, than can be expected
from a mere militia. And therefore at such times particular provisions
have been usually made for the raising of armies and the due
regulation and discipline of the soldiery: which are to be looked upon
only as temporary excrescences bred out of the distemper of the state,
and not as any part of the permanent and perpetual laws of the
kingdom. For martial law, which is built upon no settled principles,
but is entirely arbitrary in it's decisions, is, as sir Matthew Hale
observes[o], in truth and reality no law, but something indulged,
rather than allowed as a law: the necessity of order and discipline in
an army is the only thing which can give it countenance; and therefore
it ought not to be permitted in time of peace, when the king's courts
are open for all persons to receive justice according to the laws of
the land. Wherefore Edmond earl of Kent being taken at Pontefract, 15
Edw. II. and condemned by martial law, his attainder was reversed 1
Edw. III. because it was done in time of peace. And it is laid
down[p], that if a lieutenant, or other, that hath commission of
martial authority, doth in time of peace hang or otherwise execute any
man by colour of martial law, this is murder; for it is against _magna
carta_[q]. And the petition of right[r] enacts, that no soldier shall
be quartered on the subject without his own consent[s]; and that no
commission shall issue to proceed within this land according to
martial law. And whereas, after the restoration, king Charles the
second kept up about five thousand regular troops, by his own
authority, for guards and garrisons; which king James the second by
degrees increased to no less than thirty thousand, all paid from his
own civil list; it was made one of the articles of the bill of
rights[t], that the raising or keeping a standing army within the
kingdom in time of peace, unless it be with consent of parliament, is
against law.

[Footnote o: Hist. C.L. c. 2.]

[Footnote p: 3 Inst. 52.]

[Footnote q: _cap._ 29.]

[Footnote r: 3 Car. I. See also stat. 31 Car. II. c. 1.]

[Footnote s: Thus, in Poland, no soldier can be quartered upon the
gentry, the only freemen in that republic. Mod. Univ. Hist. xxxiv.
23.]

[Footnote t: Stat. 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2.]

BUT, as the fashion of keeping standing armies has universally
prevailed over all Europe of late years (though some of it's
potentates, being unable themselves to maintain them, are obliged to
have recourse to richer powers, and receive subsidiary pensions for
that purpose) it has also for many years past been annually judged
necessary by our legislature, for the safety of the kingdom, the
defence of the possessions of the crown of Great Britain, and the
preservation of the balance of power in Europe, to maintain even in
time of peace a standing body of troops, under the command of the
crown; who are however _ipso facto_ disbanded at the expiration of
every year, unless continued by parliament.

TO prevent the executive power from being able to oppress, says baron
Montesquieu[u], it is requisite that the armies with which it is
entrusted should consist of the people, and have the same spirit with
the people; as was the case at Rome, till Marius new-modelled the
legions by enlisting the rabble of Italy, and laid the foundation of
all the military tyranny that ensued. Nothing then, according to these
principles, ought to be more guarded against in a free state, than
making the military power, when such a one is necessary to be kept on
foot, a body too distinct from the people. Like ours therefore, it
should wholly be composed of natural subjects; it ought only to be
enlisted for a short and limited time; the soldiers also should live
intermixed with the people; no separate camp, no barracks, no inland
fortresses should be allowed. And perhaps it might be still better,
if, by dismissing a stated number and enlisting others at every
renewal of their term, a circulation could be kept up between the
army and the people, and the citizen and the soldier be more
intimately connected together.

[Footnote u: Sp. L. 11. 6.]

TO keep this body of troops in order, an annual act of parliament
likewise passes, "to punish mutiny and desertion, and for the better
payment of the army and their quarters." This regulates the manner in
which they are to be dispersed among the several inn-keepers and
victuallers throughout the kingdom; and establishes a law martial for
their government. By this, among other things, it is enacted, that if
any officer and soldier shall excite, or join any mutiny, or, knowing
of it, shall not give notice to the commanding officer; or shall
defect, or list in any other regiment, or sleep upon his post, or
leave it before he is relieved, or hold correspondence with a rebel or
enemy, or strike or use violence to his superior officer, or shall
disobey his lawful commands; such offender shall suffer such
punishment as a court martial shall inflict, though it extend to death
itself.

HOWEVER expedient the most strict regulations may be in time of actual
war, yet, in times of profound peace, a little relaxation of military
rigour would not, one should hope, be productive of much
inconvenience. And, upon this principle, though by our standing
laws[w] (still remaining in force, though not attended to) desertion
in time of war is made felony, without benefit of clergy, and the
offence is triable by a jury and before the judges of the common law;
yet, by our militia laws beforementioned, a much lighter punishment is
inflicted for desertion in time of peace. So, by the Roman law also,
desertion in time of war was punished with death, but more mildly in
time of tranquillity[x]. But our mutiny act makes no such distinction:
for any of the faults therein mentioned are, equally at all times,
punishable with death itself, if a court martial shall think proper.
This discretionary power of the court martial is indeed to be guided
by the directions of the crown; which, with regard to military
offences, has almost an absolute legislative power. "His majesty, says
the act, may form articles of war, and constitute courts martial, with
power to try any crime by such articles, and inflict such penalties as
the articles direct." A vast and most important trust! an unlimited
power to create crimes, and annex to them any punishments, not
extending to life or limb! These are indeed forbidden to be inflicted,
except for crimes declared to be so punishable by this act; which
crimes we have just enumerated, and, among which, we may observe that
any disobedience to lawful commands is one. Perhaps in some future
revision of this act, which is in many respects hastily penned, it may
be thought worthy the wisdom of parliament to ascertain the limits of
military subjection, and to enact express articles of war for the
government of the army, as is done for the government of the navy:
especially as, by our present constitution, the nobility and gentry of
the kingdom, who serve their country as militia officers, are annually
subjected to the same arbitrary rule, during their time of exercise.

[Footnote w: Stat. 18 Hen. VI. c. 19. 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. 2.]

[Footnote x: _Ff._ 49. 16. 5.]

ONE of the greatest advantages of our English law is, that not only
the crimes themselves which it punishes, but also the penalties which
it inflicts, are ascertained and notorious: nothing is left to
arbitrary discretion: the king by his judges dispenses what the law
has previously ordained; but is not himself the legislator. How much
therefore is it to be regretted that a set of men, whose bravery has
so often preserved the liberties of their country, should be reduced
to a state of servitude in the midst of a nation of freemen! for sir
Edward Coke will inform us[y], that it is one of the genuine marks of
servitude, to have the law, which is our rule of action, either
concealed or precarious: "_misera est servitus, ubi jus est vagum aut
incognitum_." Nor is this state of servitude quite consistent with the
maxims of sound policy observed by other free nations. For, the
greater the general liberty is which any state enjoys, the more
cautious has it usually been of introducing slavery in any particular
order or profession. These men, as baron Montesquieu observes[z],
seeing the liberty which others possess, and which they themselves
are excluded from, are apt (like eunuchs in the eastern seraglios) to
live in a state of perpetual envy and hatred towards the rest of the
community; and indulge a malignant pleasure in contributing to destroy
those privileges, to which they can never be admitted. Hence have many
free states, by departing from this rule, been endangered by the
revolt of their slaves: while, in absolute and despotic governments
where there no real liberty exists, and consequently no invidious
comparisons can be formed, such incidents are extremely rare. Two
precautions are therefore advised to be observed in all prudent and
free governments; 1. To prevent the introduction of slavery at all:
or, 2. If it be already introduced, not to intrust those slaves with
arms; who will then find themselves an overmatch for the freemen. Much
less ought the soldiery to be an exception to the people in general,
and the only state of servitude in the nation.

[Footnote y: 4 Inst. 332.]

[Footnote z: Sp. L. 15. 12.]

BUT as soldiers, by this annual act, are thus put in a worse condition
than any other subjects, so, by the humanity of our standing laws,
they are in some cases put in a much better. By statute 43 Eliz. c. 3.
a weekly allowance is to be raised in every county for the relief of
soldiers that are sick, hurt, and maimed: not forgetting the royal
hospital at Chelsea for such as are worn out in their duty. Officers
and soldiers, that have been in the king's service, are by several
statutes, enacted at the close of several wars, at liberty to use any
trade or occupation they are fit for, in any town in the kingdom
(except the two universities) notwithstanding any statute, custom, or
charter to the contrary. And soldiers in actual military service may
make their wills, and dispose of their goods, wages, and other
personal chattels, without those forms, solemnities, and expenses,
which the law requires in other cases[a]. Our law does not indeed
extend this privilege so far as the civil law; which carried it to an
extreme that borders upon the ridiculous. For if a soldier, in the
article of death, wrote any thing in bloody letters on his shield, or
in the dust of the field with his sword, it was a very good military
testament[b]. And thus much for the military state, as acknowleged by
the laws of England.

[Footnote a: Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. 5 W. III. c. 21. §. 6.]

[Footnote b: _Si milites quid in clypeo literis sanguine suo
rutilantibus adnotaverint, aut in pulvere inscripserint gladio suo,
ipso tempore quo, in praelio, vitae sortem derelinquunt, hujusmodi
voluntatem stabilem esse oportet._ _Cod._ 6. 21. 15.]

THE _maritime_ state is nearly related to the former; though much more
agreeable to the principles of our free constitution. The royal navy
of England hath ever been it's greatest defence and ornament: it is
it's antient and natural strength; the floating bulwark of the island;
an army, from which, however strong and powerful, no danger can ever
be apprehended to liberty: and accordingly it has been assiduously
cultivated, even from the earliest ages. To so much perfection was our
naval reputation arrived in the twelfth century, that the code of
maritime laws, which are called the laws of Oleron, and are received
by all nations in Europe as the ground and substruction of all their
marine constitutions, was confessedly compiled by our king Richard the
first, at the isle of Oleron on the coast of France, then part of the
possessions of the crown of England[c]. And yet, so vastly inferior
were our ancestors in this point to the present age, that even in the
maritime reign of queen Elizabeth, sir Edward Coke[d] thinks it matter
of boast, that the royal navy of England then consisted of _three and
thirty_ ships. The present condition of our marine is in great measure
owing to the salutary provisions of the statutes, called the
navigation-acts; whereby the constant increase of English shipping and
seamen was not only encouraged, but rendered unavoidably necessary. By
the statute 5 Ric. II. c. 3. in order to augment the navy of England,
then greatly diminished, it was ordained, that none of the king's
liege people should ship any merchandize out of or into the realm but
only in ships of the king's ligeance, on pain of forfeiture. In the
next year, by statute 6 Ric. II. c. 8. this wise provision was
enervated, by only obliging the merchants to give English ships, (if
able and sufficient) the preference. But the most beneficial statute
for the trade and commerce of these kingdoms is that navigation-act,
the rudiments of which were first framed in 1650[e], with a narrow
partial view: being intended to mortify the sugar islands, which were
disaffected to the parliament and still held out for Charles II, by
stopping the gainful trade which they then carried on with the
Dutch[f]; and at the same time to clip the wings of those our opulent
and aspiring neighbours. This prohibited all ships of foreign nations
from trading with any English plantations without licence from the
council of state. In 1651[g] the prohibition was extended also to the
mother country; and no goods were suffered to be imported into
England, or any of it's dependencies, in any other than English
bottoms; or in the ships of that European nation of which the
merchandize imported was the genuine growth or manufacture. At the
restoration, the former provisions were continued, by statute 12 Car.
II. c. 18. with this very material improvement, that the master and
three fourths of the mariners shall also be English subjects.

[Footnote c: 4 Inst. 144. _Coutumes de la mer._ 2.]

[Footnote d: 4 Inst. 50.]

[Footnote e: Scobell 132.]

[Footnote f: Mod. Un. Hist. xli. 289.]

[Footnote g: Scobell. 176.]

MANY laws have been made for the supply of the royal navy with seamen;
for their regulation when on board; and to confer privileges and
rewards on them during and after their service.

1. FIRST, for their supply. The power of impressing men for the sea
service by the king's commission, has been a matter of some dispute,
and submitted to with great reluctance; though it hath very clearly
and learnedly been shewn, by sir Michael Foster[h], that the practise
of impressing, and granting powers to the admiralty for that purpose,
is of very antient date, and hath been uniformly continued by a
regular series of precedents to the present time: whence he concludes
it to be part of the common law[i]. The difficulty arises from hence,
that no statute has expressly declared this power to be in the crown,
though many of them very strongly imply it. The statute 2 Ric. II. c.
4. speaks of mariners being arrested and retained for the king's
service, as of a thing well known, and practised without dispute; and
provides a remedy against their running away. By a later statute[k],
if any waterman, who uses the river Thames, shall hide himself during
the execution of any commission of pressing for the king's service, he
is liable to heavy penalties. By another[l], no fisherman shall be
taken by the queen's commission to serve as a mariner; but the
commission shall be first brought to two justices of the peace,
inhabiting near the sea coast where the mariners are to be taken, to
the intent that the justices may chuse out and return such a number of
ablebodied men, as in the commission are contained, to serve her
majesty. And, by others[m], especial protections are allowed to seamen
in particular circumstances, to prevent them from being impressed. All
which do most evidently imply a power of impressing to reside
somewhere; and, if any where, it must from the spirit of our
constitution, as well as from the frequent mention of the king's
commission, reside in the crown alone.

[Footnote h: Rep. 154.]

[Footnote i: See also Comb. 245.]

[Footnote k: Stat. 2 & 3 Ph. & M. c. 16.]

[Footnote l: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 5.]

[Footnote m: Stat. 7 & 8 W. III. c. 21. 2 Ann. c. 6. 4 & 5 Ann. c. 19.
13 Geo. II. c. 17. &c.]

BUT, besides this method of impressing, (which is only defensible from
public necessity, to which all private considerations must give way)
there are other ways that tend to the increase of seamen, and manning
the royal navy. Parishes may bind out poor boys apprentices to masters
of merchantmen, who shall be protected from impressing for the first
three years; and if they are impressed afterwards, the masters shall
be allowed their wages[n]: great advantages in point of wages are
given to volunteer seamen in order to induce them to enter into his
majesty's service[o]: and every foreign seaman, who during a war shall
serve two years in any man of war, merchantman, or privateer, is
naturalized _ipso facto_[p]. About the middle of king William's reign,
a scheme was set on foot[q] for a register of seamen to the number of
thirty thousand, for a constant and regular supply of the king's
fleet; with great privileges to the registered men, and, on the other
hand, heavy penalties in case of their non-appearance when called for:
but this registry, being judged to be rather a badge of slavery, was
abolished by statute 9 Ann. c. 21.

[Footnote n: Stat. 2 Ann. c. 6.]

[Footnote o: Stat. 1 Geo. II. st. 2. c. 14.]

[Footnote p: Stat. 13 Geo. II. c. 3.]

[Footnote q: Stat. 7 & 8 W. III. c. 21.]

2. THE method of ordering seamen in the royal fleet, and keeping up a
regular discipline there, is directed by certain express rules,
articles and orders, first enacted by the authority of parliament soon
after the restoration[r]; but since new-modelled and altered, after
the peace of Aix la Chapelle[s], to remedy some defects which were of
fatal consequence in conducting the preceding war. In these articles
of the navy almost every possible offence is set down, and the
punishment thereof annexed: in which respect the seamen have much the
advantage over their brethren in the land service; whose articles of
war are not enacted by parliament, but framed from time to time at the
pleasure of the crown. Yet from whence this distinction arose, and why
the executive power, which is limited so properly with regard to the
navy, should be so extensive with regard to the army, it is hard to
assign a reason: unless it proceeded from the perpetual establishment
of the navy, which rendered a permanent law for their regulation
expedient; and the temporary duration of the army, which subsisted
only from year to year; and might therefore with less danger be
subjected to discretionary government. But, whatever was apprehended
at the first formation of the mutiny act, the regular renewal of our
standing force at the entrance of every year has made this distinction
idle. For, if from experience past we may judge of future events, the
army is now lastingly ingrafted into the British constitution; with
this singularly fortunate circumstance, that any branch of the
legislature may annually put an end to it's legal existence, by
refusing to concur in it's continuance.

[Footnote r: Stat. 13 Car. II. st. 1. c. 9.]

[Footnote s: Stat. 22 Geo. II. c. 23.]

3. WITH regard to the privileges conferred on sailors, they are pretty
much the same with those conferred on soldiers; with regard to relief,
when maimed, or wounded, or superannuate, either by county rates, or
the royal hospital at Greenwich; with regard also to the exercise of
trades, and the power of making informal testaments: and, farther[t],
no seaman aboard his majesty's ships can be arrested for any debt,
unless the same be sworn to amount to at least twenty pounds; though,
by the annual mutiny acts, a soldier may be arrested for a debt which
extends to half that value, but not to a less amount.

[Footnote t: Stat. 1 Geo. II. st. 2. c. 14.]




CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.

OF MASTER AND SERVANT.


HAVING thus commented on the rights and duties of persons, as standing
in the _public_ relations of magistrates and people; the method I have
marked out now leads me to consider their rights and duties in
_private_ oeconomical relations.

THE three great relations in private life are, 1. That of _master and
servant_; which is founded in convenience, whereby a man is directed
to call in the assistance of others, where his own skill and labour
will not be sufficient to answer the cares incumbent upon him. 2. That
of _husband and wife_; which is founded in nature, but modified by
civil society: the one directing man to continue and multiply his
species, the other prescribing the manner in which that natural
impulse must be confined and regulated. 3. That of _parent and child_,
which is consequential to that of marriage, being it's principal end
and design: and it is by virtue of this relation that infants are
protected, maintained, and educated. But, since the parents, on whom
this care is primarily incumbent, may be snatched away by death or
otherwise, before they have completed their duty, the law has
therefore provided a fourth relation; 4. That of _guardian and ward_,
which is a kind of artificial parentage, in order to supply the
deficiency, whenever it happens, of the natural. Of all these
relations in their order.

IN discussing the relation of _master and servant_, I shall, first,
consider the several sorts of servants, and how this relation is
created and destroyed: secondly, the effects of this relation with
regard to the parties themselves: and, lastly, it's effect with regard
to other persons.

I. AS to the several sorts of servants: I have formerly observed[a]
that pure and proper slavery does not, nay cannot, subsist in England;
such I mean, whereby an absolute and unlimited power is given to the
master over the life and fortune of the slave. And indeed it is
repugnant to reason, and the principles of natural law, that such a
state should subsist any where. The three origins of the right of
slavery assigned by Justinian[b], are all of them built upon false
foundations. As, first, slavery is held to arise "_jure gentium_,"
from a state of captivity in war; whence slaves are called _mancipia,
quasi manu capti_. The conqueror, say the civilians, had a right to
the life of his captive; and, having spared that, has a right to deal
with him as he pleases. But it is an untrue position, when taken
generally, that, by the law of nature or nations, a man may kill his
enemy: he has only a right to kill him, in particular cases; in cases
of absolute necessity, for self-defence; and it is plain this absolute
necessity did not subsist, since the victor did not actually kill him,
but made him prisoner. War is itself justifiable only on principles of
self-preservation; and therefore it gives no other right over
prisoners, but merely to disable them from doing harm to us, by
confining their persons: much less can it give a right to kill,
torture, abuse, plunder, or even to enslave, an enemy, when the war is
over. Since therefore the right of _making_ slaves by captivity,
depends on a supposed right of slaughter, that foundation failing, the
consequence drawn from it must fail likewise. But, secondly, it is
said that slavery may begin "_jure civili_;" when one man sells
himself to another. This, if only meant of contracts to serve or work
for another, is very just: but when applied to strict slavery, in the
sense of the laws of old Rome or modern Barbary, is also impossible.
Every sale implies a price, a _quid pro quo_, an equivalent given to
the seller in lieu of what he transfers to the buyer: but what
equivalent can be given for life, and liberty, both of which (in
absolute slavery) are held to be in the master's disposal? His
property also, the very price he seems to receive, devolves _ipso
facto_ to his master, the instant he becomes his slave. In this case
therefore the buyer gives nothing, and the seller receives nothing: of
what validity then can a sale be, which destroys the very principles
upon which all sales are founded? Lastly, we are told, that besides
these two ways by which slaves "_fiunt_," or are acquired, they may
also be hereditary: "_servi nascuntur_;" the children of acquired
slaves are, _jure naturae_, by a negative kind of birthright, slaves
also. But this being built on the two former rights must fall together
with them. If neither captivity, nor the sale of oneself, can by the
law of nature and reason, reduce the parent to slavery, much less can
it reduce the offspring.

[Footnote a: pag. 123.]

[Footnote b: _Servi aut fiunt, aut nascuntur: fiunt jure gentium, aut
jure civili: nascuntur ex ancillis nostris._ _Inst._ 1. 3. 4.]

UPON these principles the law of England abhors, and will not endure
the existence of, slavery within this nation: so that when an attempt
was made to introduce it, by statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 3. which ordained,
that all idle vagabonds should be made slaves, and fed upon bread,
water, or small drink, and refuse meat; should wear a ring of iron
round their necks, arms, or legs; and should be compelled by beating,
chaining, or otherwise, to perform the work assigned them, were it
never so vile; the spirit of the nation could not brook this
condition, even in the most abandoned rogues; and therefore this
statute was repealed in two years afterwards[c]. And now it is laid
down[d], that a slave or negro, the instant he lands in England,
becomes a freeman; that is, the law will protect him in the enjoyment
of his person, his liberty, and his property. Yet, with regard to any
right which the master may have acquired, by contract or the like, to
the perpetual service of John or Thomas, this will remain exactly in
the same state as before: for this is no more than the same state of
subjection for life, which every apprentice submits to for the space
of seven years, or sometimes for a longer term. Hence too it follows,
that the infamous and unchristian practice of withholding baptism from
negro servants, lest they should thereby gain their liberty, is
totally without foundation, as well as without excuse. The law of
England acts upon general and extensive principles: it gives liberty,
rightly understood, that is, protection, to a jew, a turk, or a
heathen, as well as to those who profess the true religion of Christ;
and it will not dissolve a civil contract, either express or implied,
between master and servant, on account of the alteration of faith in
either of the contracting parties: but the slave is entitled to the
same liberty in England before, as after, baptism; and, whatever
service the heathen negro owed to his English master, the same is he
bound to render when a christian.

[Footnote c: Stat. 3 & 4 Edw. VI. c. 16.]

[Footnote d: Salk. 666.]

1. THE first sort of servants therefore, acknowleged by the laws of
England, are _menial servants_; so called from being _intra moenia_,
or domestics. The contract between them and their masters arises upon
the hiring. If the hiring be general without any particular time
limited, the law construes it to be a hiring for a year[e]; upon a
principle of natural equity, that the servant shall serve, and the
master maintain him, throughout all the revolutions of the respective
seasons; as well when there is work to be done, as when there is
not[f]: but the contract may be made for any larger or smaller term.
All single men between twelve years old and sixty, and married ones
under thirty years of age, and all single women between twelve and
forty, not having any visible livelihood, are compellable by two
justices to go out to service, for the promotion of honest industry:
and no master can put away his servant, or servant leave his master,
either before or at the end of his term, without a quarter's warning;
unless upon reasonable cause to be allowed by a justice of the
peace[g]: but they may part by consent, or make a special bargain.

[Footnote e: Co. Litt. 42.]

[Footnote f: F.N.B. 168.]

[Footnote g: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4.]

2. ANOTHER species of servants are called _apprentices_ (from
_apprendre_, to learn) and are usually bound for a term of years, by
deed indented or indentures, to serve their masters, and be maintained
and instructed by them: for which purpose our statute law[h] has made
minors capable of binding themselves. This is usually done to persons
of trade, in order to learn their art and mystery; and sometimes very
large sums are given with them, as a premium for such their
instruction: but it may be done to husbandmen, nay to gentlemen, and
others. And[i] children of poor persons may be apprenticed out by the
overseers, with consent of two justices, till twenty four years of
age, to such persons as are thought fitting; who are also compellable
to take them: and it is held, that gentlemen of fortune, and
clergymen, are equally liable with others to such compulsion[k].
Apprentices to trades may be discharged on reasonable cause, either at
request of themselves or masters, at the quarter sessions, or by one
justice, with appeal to the sessions[l]: who may, by the equity of the
statute, if they think it reasonable, direct restitution of a ratable
share of the money given with the apprentice[m]. And parish
apprentices may be discharged in the same manner, by two justices[n].

[Footnote h: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4.]

[Footnote i: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4. 43 Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. I. c. 25. 7
Jac. I. c. 3. 8 & 9 W. & M. c. 30. 2 & 3 Ann. c. 6. 4 Ann. c. 19. 17
Geo. II. c. 5.]

[Footnote k: Salk. 57. 491.]

[Footnote l: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4.]

[Footnote m: Salk. 67.]

[Footnote n: Stat. 20 Geo. II. c. 19.]

3. A THIRD species of servants are _labourers_, who are only hired by
the day or the week, and do not live _intra moenia_, as part of the
family; concerning whom the statute so often cited[o] has made many
very good regulations; 1. Directing that all persons who have no
visible effects may be compelled to work: 2. Defining how long they
must continue at work in summer and winter: 3. Punishing such as leave
or desert their work: 4. Empowering the justices at sessions, or the
sheriff of the county, to settle their wages: and 5. Inflicting
penalties on such as either give, or exact, more wages than are so
settled.

[Footnote o: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4.]

4. THERE is yet a fourth species of servants, if they may be so
called, being rather in a superior, a ministerial, capacity; such as
_stewards_, _factors_, and _bailiffs_: whom however the law considers
as servants _pro tempore_, with regard to such of their acts, as
affect their master's or employer's property. Which leads me to
consider,

II. THE manner in which this relation, of service, affects either the
master or servant. And, first, by hiring and service for a year, or
apprenticeship under indentures, a person gains a settlement in that
parish wherein he last served forty days[p]. In the next place persons
serving as apprentices to any trade have an exclusive right to
exercise that trade in any part of England[q]. This law, with regard
to the exclusive part of it, has by turns been looked upon as a hard
law, or as a beneficial one, according to the prevailing humour of the
times: which has occasioned a great variety of resolutions in the
courts of law concerning it; and attempts have been frequently made
for it's repeal, though hitherto without success. At common law every
man might use what trade he pleased; but this statute restrains that
liberty to such as have served as apprentices: the adversaries to
which provision say, that all restrictions (which tend to introduce
monopolies) are pernicious to trade; the advocates for it alledge,
that unskilfulness in trades is equally detrimental to the public, as
monopolies. This reason indeed only extends to such trades, in the
exercise whereof skill is required: but another of their arguments
goes much farther; viz. that apprenticeships are useful to the
commonwealth, by employing of youth, and learning them to be early
industrious; but that no one would be induced to undergo a seven years
servitude, if others, though equally skilful, were allowed the same
advantages without having undergone the same discipline: and in this
there seems to be much reason. However, the resolutions of the courts
have in general rather confined than extended the restriction. No
trades are held to be within the statute, but such as were in being
at the making of it[r]: for trading in a country village,
apprenticeships are not requisite[s]: and following the trade seven
years is sufficient without any binding; for the statute only says,
the person must serve _as_ an apprentice, and does not require an
actual apprenticeship to have existed[t].

[Footnote p: See page 352.]

[Footnote q: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4.]

[Footnote r: Lord Raym. 514.]

[Footnote s: 1 Ventr. 51. 2 Keb. 583.]

[Footnote t: Lord Raym. 1179.]

A MASTER may by law correct his apprentice or servant for negligence
or other misbehaviour, so it be done with moderation[u]: though, if
the master's wife beats him, it is good cause of departure[w]. But if
any servant, workman, or labourer assaults his master or dame, he
shall suffer one year's imprisonment, and other open corporal
punishment, not extending to life or limb[x].

[Footnote u: 1 Hawk. P.C. 130. Lamb. Eiren. 127.]

[Footnote w: F.N.B. 168.]

[Footnote x: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4.]

BY service all servants and labourers, except apprentices, become
entitled to wages: according to their agreement, if menial servants;
or according to the appointment of the sheriff or sessions, if
labourers or servants in husbandry: for the statutes for regulation of
wages extend to such servants only[y]; it being impossible for any
magistrate to be a judge of the employment of menial servants, or of
course to assess their wages.

[Footnote y: 2 Jones. 47.]

III. LET us, lastly, see how strangers may be affected by this
relation of master and servant: or how a master may behave towards
others on behalf of his servant; and what a servant may do on behalf
of his master.

AND, first, the master may _maintain_, that is, abet and assist his
servant in any action at law against a stranger: whereas, in general,
it is an offence against public justice to encourage suits and
animosities, by helping to bear the expense of them, and is called in
law maintenance[z]. A master also may bring an action against any man
for beating or maiming his servant; but in such case he must assign,
as a special reason for so doing, his own damage by the loss of his
service; and this loss must be proved upon the trial[a]. A master
likewise may justify an assault in defence of his servant, and a
servant in defence of his master[b]: the master, because he has an
interest in his servant, not to be deprived of his service; the
servant, because it is part of his duty, for which he receives his
wages, to stand by and defend his master[c]. Also if any person do
hire or retain my servant, being in my service, for which the servant
departeth from me and goeth to serve the other, I may have an action
for damages against both the new master and the servant, or either of
them: but if the new master did not know that he is my servant, no
action lies; unless he afterwards refuse to restore him upon
information and demand[d]. The reason and foundation upon which all
this doctrine is built, seem to be the property that every man has in
the service of his domestics; acquired by the contract of hiring, and
purchased by giving them wages.

[Footnote z: 2 Roll. Abr. 115.]

[Footnote a: 9 Rep. 113.]

[Footnote b: 2 Roll. Abr. 546.]

[Footnote c: In like manner, by the laws of king Alfred, c. 38. a
servant was allowed to fight for his master, a parent for his child,
and a husband or father for the chastity of his wife or daughter.]

[Footnote d: F.N.B. 167, 168.]

AS for those things which a servant may do on behalf of his master,
they seem all to proceed upon this principle, that the master is
answerable for the act of his servant, if done by his command, either
expressly given, or implied: _nam qui facit per alium, facit per
se_[e]. Therefore, if the servant commit a trespass by the command or
encouragement of his master, the master shall be guilty of it: not
that the servant is excused, for he is only to obey his master in
matters that are honest and lawful. If an innkeeper's servants rob his
guests, the master is bound to restitution[f]: for as there is a
confidence reposed in him, that he will take care to provide honest
servants, his negligence is a kind of implied consent to the robbery;
_nam, qui non prohibet, cum prohibere possit, jubet_. So likewise if
the drawer at a tavern sells a man bad wine, whereby his health is
injured, he may bring an action against the master[g]: for, although
the master did not expressly order the servant to sell it to that
person in particular, yet his permitting him to draw and sell it at
all is impliedly a general command.

[Footnote e: 4 Inst. 109.]

[Footnote f: Noy's Max. c. 43.]

[Footnote g: 1 Roll. Abr. 95.]

IN the same manner, whatever a servant is permitted to do in the usual
course of his business, is equivalent to a general command. If I pay
money to a banker's servant, the banker is answerable for it: if I pay
it to a clergyman's or a physician's servant, whose usual business it
is not to receive money for his master, and he imbezzles it, I must
pay it over again. If a steward lets a lease of a farm, without the
owner's knowlege, the owner must stand to the bargain; for this is the
steward's business. A wife, a friend, a relation, that use to transact
business for a man, are _quoad hoc_ his servants; and the principal
must answer for their conduct: for the law implies, that they act
under a general command; and, without such a doctrine as this, no
mutual intercourse between man and man could subsist with any
tolerable convenience. If I usually deal with a tradesman by myself,
or constantly pay him ready money, I am not answerable for what my
servant takes up upon trust; for here is no implied order to the
tradesman to trust my servant: but if I usually send him upon trust,
or sometimes on trust, and sometimes with ready money, I am answerable
for all he takes up; for the tradesman cannot possibly distinguish
when he comes by my order, and when upon his own authority[h].

[Footnote h: Dr & Stud. d. 2. c. 42. Noy's max. c. 44.]

IF a servant, lastly, by his negligence does any damage to a stranger,
the master shall answer for his neglect: if a smith's servant lames a
horse while he is shoing him, an action lies against the master, and
not against the servant. But in these cases the damage must be done,
while he is actually employed in the master's service; otherwise the
servant shall answer for his own misbehaviour. Upon this principle,
by the common law[i], if a servant kept his master's fire negligently,
so that his neighbour's house was burned down thereby, an action lay
against the master; because this negligence happened in his service:
otherwise, if the servant, going along the street with a torch, by
negligence sets fire to a house; for there he is not in his master's
immediate service, and must himself answer the damage personally. But
now the common law is, in the former case, altered by statute 6 Ann.
c. 3. which ordains that no action shall be maintained against any, in
whose house or chamber any fire shall accidentally begin; for their
own loss is sufficient punishment for their own or their servants'
carelessness. But if such fire happens through negligence of any
servant (whose loss is commonly very little) such servant shall
forfeit 100_l_, to be distributed among the sufferers; and, in default
of payment, shall be committed to some workhouse and there kept to
hard labour for eighteen months[k]. A master is, lastly, chargeable if
any of his family layeth or casteth any thing out of his house into
the street or common highway, to the damage of any individual, or the
common nusance of his majesty's liege people[l]: for the master hath
the superintendance and charge of all his houshold. And this also
agrees with the civil law[m]; which holds, that the _pater familias_,
in this and similar cases, "_ob alterius culpam tenetur, sive servi,
sive liberi_."

[Footnote i: Noy's max. c. 44.]

[Footnote k: Upon a similar principle, by the law of the twelve tables
at Rome, a person by whose negligence any fire began was bound to pay
double to the sufferers; or if he was not able to pay, was to suffer a
corporal punishment.]

[Footnote l: Noy's max. c. 44.]

[Footnote m: _Ff._ 9. 3. 1. _Inst._ 4. 5. 1.]

WE may observe, that in all the cases here put, the master may be
frequently a loser by the trust reposed in his servant, but never can
be a gainer: he may frequently be answerable for his servant's
misbehaviour, but never can shelter himself from punishment by laying
the blame on his agent. The reason of this is still uniform and the
same; that the wrong done by the servant is looked upon in law as the
wrong of the master himself; and it is a standing maxim, that no man
shall be allowed to make any advantage of his own wrong.




CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.

OF HUSBAND AND WIFE.


THE second private relation of persons is that of marriage, which
includes the reciprocal duties of husband and wife; or, as most of our
elder law books call them, of _baron_ and _feme_. In the consideration
of which I shall in the first place enquire, how marriages may be
contracted or made; shall next point out the manner in which they may
be dissolved; and shall, lastly, take a view of the legal effects and
consequence of marriage.

I. OUR law considers marriage in no other light than as a civil
contract. The _holiness_ of the matrimonial state is left entirely to
the ecclesiastical law: the temporal courts not having jurisdiction to
consider unlawful marriages as a sin, but merely as a civil
inconvenience. The punishment therefore, or annulling, of incestuous
or other unscriptural marriages, is the province of the spiritual
courts; which act _pro salute animae_[a]. And, taking it in this civil
light, the law treats it as it does all other contracts; allowing it
to be good and valid in all cases, where the parties at the time of
making it were, in the first place, _willing_ to contract; secondly,
_able_ to contract; and, lastly, actually _did_ contract, in the
proper forms and solemnities required by law.

[Footnote a: Salk. 121.]

FIRST, they must be _willing_ to contract. "_Consensus, non
concubitus, facit nuptias_," is the maxim of the civil law in this
case[b]: and it is adopted by the common lawyers[c], who indeed have
borrowed (especially in antient times) almost all their notions of the
legitimacy of marriage from the canon and civil laws.

[Footnote b: _Ff._ 50. 17. 30.]

[Footnote c: Co. Litt. 33.]

SECONDLY, they must be _able_ to contract. In general, all persons are
able to contract themselves in marriage, unless they labour under some
particular disabilities, and incapacities. What those are, it will
here be our business to enquire.

NOW these disabilities are of two sorts: first, such as are canonical,
and therefore sufficient by the ecclesiastical laws to avoid the
marriage in the spiritual court; but these in our law only make the
marriage voidable, and not _ipso facto_ void, until sentence of
nullity be obtained. Of this nature are pre-contract; consanguinity,
or relation by blood; and affinity, or relation by marriage; and some
particular corporal infirmities. And these canonical disabilities are
either grounded upon the express words of the divine law, or are
consequences plainly deducible from thence: it therefore being sinful
in the persons, who labour under them, to attempt to contract
matrimony together, they are properly the object of the ecclesiastical
magistrate's coercion; in order to separate the offenders, and inflict
penance for the offence, _pro salute animarum_. But such marriages not
being void _ab initio_, but voidable only by sentence of separation,
they are esteemed valid to all civil purposes, unless such separation
is actually made during the life of the parties. For, after the death
of either of them, the courts of common law will not suffer the
spiritual court to declare such marriages to have been void; because
such declaration cannot now tend to the reformation of the parties[d].
And therefore when a man had married his first wife's sister, and
after her death the bishop's court was proceeding to annul the
marriage and bastardize the issue, the court of king's bench granted
a prohibition _quoad hoc_; but permitted them to proceed to punish the
husband for incest[e]. These canonical disabilities, being entirely
the province of the ecclesiastical courts, our books are perfectly
silent concerning them. But there are a few statutes, which serve as
directories to those courts, of which it will be proper to take
notice. By statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 38. it is declared, that all
persons may lawfully marry, but such as are prohibited by God's law;
and that all marriages contracted by lawful persons in the face of the
church, and consummate with bodily knowlege, and fruit of children,
shall be indissoluble. And (because in the times of popery a great
variety of degrees of kindred were made impediments to marriage, which
impediments might however be bought off for money) it is declared by
the same statute, that nothing (God's law except) shall impeach any
marriage, but within the Levitical degrees; the farthest of which is
that between uncle and niece[f]. By the same statute all impediments,
arising from pre-contracts to other persons, were abolished and
declared of none effect, unless they had been consummated with bodily
knowlege: in which case the canon law holds such contract to be a
marriage _de facto_. But this branch of the statute was repealed by
statute 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. 23. How far the act of 26 Geo. II. c. 33.
(which prohibits all suits in ecclesiastical courts to compel a
marriage, in consequence of any contract) may collaterally extend to
revive this clause of Henry VIII's statute, and abolish the impediment
of pre-contract, I leave to be considered by the canonists.

[Footnote d: _Ibid._]

[Footnote e: Salk. 548.]

[Footnote f: Gilb. Rep. 158.]

THE other sort of disabilities are those which are created, or at
least enforced, by the municipal laws. And, though some of them may be
grounded on natural law, yet they are regarded by the laws of the
land, not so much in the light of any moral offence, as on account of
the civil inconveniences they draw after them. These civil
disabilities make the contract void _ab initio_, and not merely
voidable: not that they dissolve a contract already formed, but they
render the parties incapable of forming any contract at all: they do
not put asunder those who are joined together, but they previously
hinder the junction. And, if any persons under these legal
incapacities come together, it is a meretricious, and not a
matrimonial, union.

1. THE first of these legal disabilities is a prior marriage, or
having another husband or wife living; in which case, besides the
penalties consequent upon it as a felony, the second marriage is to
all intents and purposes void[g]: polygamy being condemned both by the
law of the new testament, and the policy of all prudent states,
especially in these northern climates. And Justinian, even in the
climate of modern Turkey, is express[h], that "_duas uxores eodem
tempore habere non licet_."

[Footnote g: Bro. Abr. _tit. Bastardy._ pl. 8.]

[Footnote h: _Inst._ 1. 10. 6.]

2. THE next legal disability is want of age. This is sufficient to
avoid all other contracts, on account of the imbecillity of judgment
in the parties contracting; _a fortiori_ therefore it ought to avoid
this, the most important contract of any. Therefore if a boy under
fourteen, or a girl under twelve years of age, marries, this marriage
is only inchoate and imperfect; and, when either of them comes to the
age of consent aforesaid, they may disagree and declare the marriage
void, without any divorce or sentence in the spiritual court. This is
founded on the civil law[i]. But the canon law pays a greater regard
to the constitution, than the age, of the parties[k]: for if they are
_habiles ad matrimonium_, it is a good marriage, whatever their age
may be. And in our law it is so far a marriage, that, if at the age of
consent they agree to continue together, they need not be married
again[l]. If the husband be of years of discretion, and the wife under
twelve, when she comes to years of discretion he may disagree as well
as she may: for in contracts the obligation must be mutual; both must
be bound, or neither: and so it is, _vice versa_, when the wife is of
years of discretion, and the husband under[m].

[Footnote i: _Leon. Constit._ 109.]

[Footnote k: _Decretal._ _l._ 4. _tit._ 2. _qu._ 3.]

[Footnote l: Co. Litt. 79.]

[Footnote m: _Ibid._]

3. ANOTHER incapacity arises from want of consent of parents or
guardians. By the common law, if the parties themselves were of the
age of consent, there wanted no other concurrence to make the marriage
valid: and this was agreeable to the canon law. But, by several
statutes[n], penalties of 100_l._ are laid on every clergyman who
marries a couple either without publication of banns (which may give
notice to parents or guardians) or without a licence, to obtain which
the consent of parents or guardians must be sworn to. And by the
statute 4 & 5 Ph. & M. c. 8. whosoever marries any woman child under
the age of sixteen years, without consent of parents or guardians,
shall be subject to fine, or five years imprisonment: and her estate
during the husband's life shall go to and be enjoyed by the next heir.
The civil law indeed required the consent of the parent or tutor at
all ages; unless the children were emancipated, or out of the parents
power[o]: and, if such consent from the father was wanting, the
marriage was null, and the children illegitimate[p]; but the consent
of the mother or guardians, if unreasonably withheld, might be
redressed and supplied by the judge, or the president of the
province[q]: and if the father was _non compos_, a similar remedy was
given[r]. These provisions are adopted and imitated by the French and
Hollanders, with this difference: that in France the sons cannot marry
without consent of parents till thirty years of age, nor the daughters
till twenty five[s]; and in Holland, the sons are at their own
disposal at twenty five, and the daughters at twenty[t]. Thus hath
stood, and thus at present stands, the law in other neighbouring
countries. And it has been lately thought proper to introduce somewhat
of the same policy into our laws, by statute 26 Geo. II. c. 33.
whereby it is enacted, that all marriages celebrated by licence (for
banns suppose notice) where either of the parties is under twenty
one, (not being a widow or widower, who are supposed emancipated)
without the consent of the father, or, if he be not living, of the
mother or guardians, shall be absolutely void. A like provision is
made as in the civil law, where the mother or guardian is _non
compos_, beyond sea, or unreasonably froward, to dispense with such
consent at the discretion of the lord chancellor: but no provision is
made, in case the father should labour under any mental or other
incapacity. Much may be, and much has been, said both for and against
this innovation upon our antient laws and constitution. On the one
hand, it prevents the clandestine marriages of minors, which are often
a terrible inconvenience to those private families wherein they
happen. On the other hand, restraints upon marriage, especially among
the lower class, are evidently detrimental to the public, by hindering
the encrease of people; and to religion and morality, by encouraging
licentiousness and debauchery among the single of both sexes; and
thereby destroying one end of society and government, which is,
_concubitu prohibere vago_. And of this last inconvenience the Roman
laws were so sensible, that at the same time that they forbad marriage
without the consent of parents or guardians, they were less rigorous
upon that very account with regard to other restraints: for, if a
parent did not provide a husband for his daughter, by the time she
arrived at the age of twenty five, and she afterwards made a slip in
her conduct, he was not allowed to disinherit her upon that account;
"_quia non sua culpa, sed parentum, id commisisse cognoscitur_[u]."

[Footnote n: 6 & 7 W. III. c. 6. 7 & 8 W. III. c. 35. 10 Ann. c. 19.]

[Footnote o: _Ff._ 23. 2. 2, & 18.]

[Footnote p: _Ff._ 1. 5. 11.]

[Footnote q: _Cod._ 5. 4. 1, & 20.]

[Footnote r: _Inst._ 1. 10. 1.]

[Footnote s: Domat, of dowries §. 2. Montesq. Sp. L. 23. 7.]

[Footnote t: _Vinnius in Inst._ _l._ 1. _t._ 10.]

[Footnote u: _Nov._ 115. §. 11.]

4. A FOURTH incapacity is want of reason; without a competent share of
which, as no other, so neither can the matrimonial contract, be valid.
Idiots and lunatics, by the old common law, might have married[w];
wherein it was manifestly defective. The civil law judged much more
sensibly, when it made such deprivations of reason a previous
impediment; though not a cause of divorce, if they happened after
marriage[x]. This defect in our laws is however remedied with regard
to lunatics, and persons under frenzies, by the express words of the
statute 15 Geo. II. c. 30. and idiots, if not within the letter of the
statute, are at least within the reason of it.

[Footnote w: 1 Roll. Abr. 357.]

[Footnote x: _Ff._ 23. _tit._ 1. _l._ 8. & _tit._ 2. _l._ 16.]

LASTLY, the parties must not only be willing, and able, to contract,
but actually must contract themselves in due form of law, to make it a
good civil marriage. Any contract made, _per verba de praesenti_, or
in words of the present tense, and in case of cohabitation _per verba
de futuro_ also, between persons able to contract, was before the late
act deemed a valid marriage to many purposes; and the parties might be
compelled in the spiritual courts to celebrate it _in facie
ecclesiae_. But these verbal contracts are now of no force, to compel
a future marriage[y]. Neither is any marriage at present valid, that
is not celebrated in some parish church or public chapel, unless by
dispensation from the arch-bishop of Canterbury. It must also be
preceded by publication of banns, or by licence from the spiritual
judge. Many other formalities are likewise prescribed by the act; the
neglect of which, though penal, does not invalidate the marriage. It
is held to be also essential to a marriage, that it be performed by a
person in orders[z]; though the intervention of a priest to solemnize
this contract is merely _juris positivi_, and not _juris naturalis aut
divini_: it being said that pope Innocent the third was the first who
ordained the celebration of marriage in the church[a]; before which it
was totally a civil contract. And, in the times of the grand
rebellion, all marriages were performed by the justices of the peace;
and these marriages were declared valid, without any fresh
solemnization, by statute 12 Car. II. c. 33. But, as the law now
stands, we may upon the whole collect, that no marriage by the
temporal law is _ipso facto_ void, that is celebrated by a person in
orders,--in a parish church or public chapel (or elsewhere, by special
dispensation)--in pursuance of banns or a licence,--between single
persons,--consenting,--of sound mind,--and of the age of twenty one
years;--or of the age of fourteen in males and twelve in females, with
consent of parents or guardians, or without it, in case of widowhood.
And no marriage is _voidable_ by the ecclesiastical law, after the
death of either of the parties; nor during their lives, unless for the
canonical impediments of pre-contract, if that indeed still exists; of
consanguinity; and of affinity, or corporal imbecillity, subsisting
previous to the marriage.

[Footnote y: Stat. 26 Geo. II. c. 33.]

[Footnote z: Salk. 119.]

[Footnote a: Moor 170.]

II. I AM next to consider the manner in which marriages may be
dissolved; and this is either by death, or divorce. There are two
kinds of divorce, the one total, the other partial; the one _a vinculo
matrimonii_, the other merely _a mensa et thoro_. The total divorce,
_a vinculo matrimonii_, must be for some of the canonical causes of
impediment before-mentioned; and those, existing _before_ the
marriage, as is always the case in consanguinity; not supervenient, or
arising _afterwards_, as may be the case in affinity or corporal
imbecillity. For in cases of total divorce, the marriage is declared
null, as having been absolutely unlawful _ab initio_; and the parties
are therefore separated _pro salute animarum_: for which reason, as
was before observed, no divorce can be obtained, but during the life
of the parties. The issue of such marriage, as is thus entirely
dissolved, are bastards[b].

[Footnote b: Co. Litt. 235.]

DIVORCE _a mensa et thoro_ is when the marriage is just and lawful _ab
initio_, and therefore the law is tender of dissolving it; but, for
some supervenient cause, it becomes improper or impossible for the
parties to live together: as in the case of intolerable ill temper, or
adultery, in either of the parties. For the canon law, which the
common law follows in this case, deems so highly and with such
mysterious reverence of the nuptial tie, that it will not allow it to
be unloosed for any cause whatsoever, that arises after the union is
made. And this is said to be built on the divine revealed law; though
that expressly assigns incontinence as a cause, and indeed the only
cause, why a man may put away his wife and marry another[c]. The civil
law, which is partly of pagan original, allows many causes of absolute
divorce; and some of them pretty severe ones, (as if a wife goes to
the theatre or the public games, without the knowlege and consent of
the husband[d]) but among them adultery is the principal, and with
reason named the first[e]. But with us in England adultery is only a
cause of separation from bed and board[f]: for which the best reason
that can be given, is, that if divorces were allowed to depend upon a
matter within the power of either the parties, they would probably be
extremely frequent; as was the case when divorces were allowed for
canonical disabilities, on the mere confession of the parties[g],
which is now prohibited by the canons[h]. However, divorces _a vinculo
matrimonii_, for adultery, have of late years been frequently granted
by act of parliament.

[Footnote c: Matt. xix. 9.]

[Footnote d: _Nov._ 117.]

[Footnote e: _Cod._ 5. 17. 8.]

[Footnote f: Moor 683.]

[Footnote g: 2 Mod. 314.]

[Footnote h: Can. 1603 c. 105.]

IN case of divorce _a mensa et thoro_, the law allows alimony to the
wife; which is that allowance, which is made to a woman for her
support out of the husband's estate; being settled at the discretion
of the ecclesiastical judge, on consideration of all the circumstances
of the case. This is sometimes called her _estovers_; for which, if he
refuses payment, there is (besides the ordinary process of
excommunication) a writ at common law _de estoveriis habendis_, in
order to recover it[i]. It is generally proportioned to the rank and
quality of the parties. But in case of elopement, and living with an
adulterer, the law allows her no alimony[k].

[Footnote i: 1 Lev. 6.]

[Footnote k: Cowel. tit. Alimony.]

III. HAVING thus shewn how marriages may be made, or dissolved, I come
now, lastly, to speak of the legal consequences of such making, or
dissolution.

BY marriage, the husband and wife are one person in law[l]: that is,
the very being or legal existence of the woman is suspended during the
marriage, or at least is incorporated and consolidated into that of
the husband: under whose wing, protection, and _cover_, she performs
every thing; and is therefore called in our law-french a
_feme-covert_; is said to be _covert-baron_, or under the protection
and influence of her husband, her _baron_, or lord; and her condition
during her marriage is called her _coverture_. Upon this principle, of
an union of person in husband and wife, depend almost all the legal
rights, duties, and disabilities, that either of them acquire by the
marriage. I speak not at present of the rights of property, but of
such as are merely _personal_. For this reason, a man cannot grant any
thing to his wife, or enter into covenant with her[m]: for the grant
would be to suppose her separate existence; and to covenant with her,
would be only to covenant with himself: and therefore it is also
generally true, that all compacts made between husband and wife, when
single, are voided by the intermarriage[n]. A woman indeed may be
attorney for her husband[o]; for that implies no separation from, but
is rather a representation of, her lord. And a husband may also
bequeath any thing to his wife by will; for that cannot take effect
till the coverture is determined by his death[p]. The husband is bound
to provide his wife with necessaries by law, as much as himself; and
if she contracts debts for them, he is obliged to pay them[q]: but for
any thing besides necessaries, he is not chargeable[r]. Also if a wife
elopes, and lives with another man, the husband is not chargeable even
for necessaries[s]; at least if the person, who furnishes them, is
sufficiently apprized of her elopement[t]. If the wife be indebted
before marriage, the husband is bound afterwards to pay the debt; for
he has adopted her and her circumstances together[u]. If the wife be
injured in her person or her property, she can bring no action for
redress without her husband's concurrence, and in his name, as well as
her own[w]: neither can she be sued, without making the husband a
defendant[x]. There is indeed one case where the wife shall sue and be
sued as a feme sole, viz. where the husband has abjured the realm, or
is banished[y]: for then he is dead in law; and, the husband being
thus disabled to sue for or defend the wife, it would be most
unreasonable if she had no remedy, or could make no defence at all. In
criminal prosecutions, it is true, the wife may be indicted and
punished separately[z]; for the union is only a civil union. But, in
trials of any sort, they are not allowed to be evidence for, or
against, each other[a]: partly because it is impossible their
testimony should be indifferent; but principally because of the union
of person: and therefore, if they were admitted to be witnesses _for_
each other, they would contradict one maxim of law, "_nemo in propria
causa testis esse debet_;" and if _against_ each other, they would
contradict another maxim, "_nemo tenetur seipsum accusare_." But where
the offence is directly against the person of the wife, this rule has
been usually dispensed with[b]: and therefore, by statute 3 Hen. VII.
c. 2. in case a woman be forcibly taken away, and married, she may be
a witness against such her husband, in order to convict him of felony.
For in this case she can with no propriety be reckoned his wife;
because a main ingredient, her consent, was wanting to the contract:
and also there is another maxim of law, that no man shall take
advantage of his own wrong; which the ravisher here would do, if by
forcibly marrying a woman, he could prevent her from being a witness,
who is perhaps the only witness, to that very fact.

[Footnote l: Co. Litt. 112.]

[Footnote m: _Ibid._]

[Footnote n: Cro. Car. 551.]

[Footnote o: F.N.B. 27.]

[Footnote p: Co. Litt. 112.]

[Footnote q: Salk. 118.]

[Footnote r: 1 Sid. 120.]

[Footnote s: Stra. 647.]

[Footnote t: 1 Lev. 5.]

[Footnote u: 3 Mod. 186.]

[Footnote w: Salk. 119. 1 Roll. Abr. 347.]

[Footnote x: 1 Leon. 312. This was also the practice in the courts of
Athens. (Pott. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 21.)]

[Footnote y: Co. Litt. 133.]

[Footnote z: 1 Hawk. P.C. 3.]

[Footnote a: 2 Haw. P.C. 431.]

[Footnote b: State trials, vol. 1. Lord Audley's case. Stra. 633.]

IN the civil law the husband and wife are considered as two distinct
persons; and may have separate estates, contracts, debts, and
injuries[c]: and therefore, in our ecclesiastical courts, a woman may
sue and be sued without her husband[d].

[Footnote c: _Cod._ 4. 12. 1.]

[Footnote d: 2 Roll. Abr. 298.]

BUT, though our law in general considers man and wife as one person,
yet there are some instances in which she is separately considered; as
inferior to him, and acting by his compulsion. And therefore all deeds
executed, and acts done, by her, during her coverture, are void, or at
least voidable; except it be a fine, or the like matter of record, in
which case she must be solely and secretly examined, to learn if her
act be voluntary[e]. She cannot by will devise lands to her husband,
unless under special circumstances; for at the time of making it she
is supposed to be under his coercion[f]. And in some felonies, and
other inferior crimes, committed by her, through constraint of her
husband, the law excuses her[g]: but this extends not to treason or
murder.

[Footnote e: Litt. §. 669, 670.]

[Footnote f: Co. Litt. 112.]

[Footnote g: 1 Hawk. P.C. 2.]

THE husband also (by the old law) might give his wife moderate
correction[h]. For, as he is to answer for her misbehaviour, the law
thought it reasonable to intrust him with this power of restraining
her, by domestic chastisement, in the same moderation that a man is
allowed to correct his servants or children; for whom the master or
parent is also liable in some cases to answer. But this power of
correction was confined within reasonable bounds[i]; and the husband
was prohibited to use any violence to his wife, _aliter quam ad virum,
ex causa regiminis et castigationis uxoris suae, licite et
rationabiliter pertinet_[k]. The civil law gave the husband the same,
or a larger, authority over his wife; allowing him, for some
misdemesnors, _flagellis et fustibus acriter verberare uxorem_; for
others, only _modicam castigationem adhibere_[l]. But, with us, in
the politer reign of Charles the second, this power of correction
began to be doubted[m]: and a wife may now have security of the peace
against her husband[n]; or, in return, a husband against his wife[o].
Yet the lower rank of people, who were always fond of the old common
law, still claim and exert their antient privilege: and the courts of
law will still permit a husband to restrain a wife of her liberty, in
case of any gross misbehaviour[p].

[Footnote h: _Ibid._ 130.]

[Footnote i: Moor. 874.]

[Footnote k: F.N.B. 80.]

[Footnote l: _Nov._ 117. _c._ 14. & Van Leeuwen _in loc._]

[Footnote m: 1 Sid. 113. 3 Keb. 433.]

[Footnote n: 2 Lev. 128.]

[Footnote o: Stra. 1207.]

[Footnote p: Stra. 478. 875.]

THESE are the chief legal effects of marriage during the coverture;
upon which we may observe, that even the disabilities, which the wife
lies under, are for the most part intended for her protection and
benefit. So great a favourite is the female sex of the laws of
England.




CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH.

OF PARENT AND CHILD.


THE next, and the most universal relation in nature, is immediately
derived from the preceding, being that between parent and child.

CHILDREN are of two sorts; legitimate, and spurious, or bastards: each
of which we shall consider in their order; and first of legitimate
children.

I. A LEGITIMATE child is he that is born in lawful wedlock, or within
a competent time afterwards. "_Pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant_,"
is the rule of the civil law[a]; and this holds with the civilians,
whether the nuptials happen before, or after, the birth of the child.
With us in England the rule is narrowed, for the nuptials must be
precedent to the birth; of which more will be said when we come to
consider the case of bastardy. At present let us enquire into, 1. The
legal duties of parents to their legitimate children. 2. Their power
over them. 3. The duties of such children to their parents.

[Footnote a: _Ff._ 2. 4. 5.]

1. AND, first, the duties of parents to legitimate children: which
principally consist in three particulars; their maintenance, their
protection, and their education.

THE duty of parents to provide for the _maintenance_ of their children
is a principle of natural law; an obligation, says Puffendorf[b], laid
on them not only by nature herself, but by their own proper act, in
bringing them into the world: for they would be in the highest manner
injurious to their issue, if they only gave the children life, that
they might afterwards see them perish. By begetting them therefore
they have entered into a voluntary obligation, to endeavour, as far as
in them lies, that the life which they have bestowed shall be
supported and preserved. And thus the children will have a perfect
_right_ of receiving maintenance from their parents. And the president
Montesquieu[c] has a very just observation upon this head: that the
establishment of marriage in all civilized states is built on this
natural obligation of the father to provide for his children; for that
ascertains and makes known the person who is bound to fulfil this
obligation: whereas, in promiscuous and illicit conjunctions, the
father is unknown; and the mother finds a thousand obstacles in her
way;--shame, remorse, the constraint of her sex, and the rigor of
laws;--that stifle her inclinations to perform this duty: and besides,
she generally wants ability.

[Footnote b: L. of N. l. 4. c. 11.]

[Footnote c: Sp. L. l. 23. c. 2.]

THE municipal laws of all well-regulated states have taken care to
enforce this duty: though providence has done it more effectually than
any laws, by implanting in the breast of every parent that natural
[Greek: storgê], or insuperable degree of affection, which not even
the deformity of person or mind, not even the wickedness, ingratitude,
and rebellion of children, can totally suppress or extinguish.

THE civil law[d] obliges the parent to provide maintenance for his
child; and, if he refuses, "_judex de ea re cognoscet_." Nay, it
carries this matter so far, that it will not suffer a parent at his
death totally to disinherit his child, without expressly giving his
reason for so doing; and there are fourteen such reasons reckoned
up[e], which may justify such disinherison. If the parent alleged no
reason, or a bad, or false one, the child might set the will aside,
_tanquam testamentum inofficiosum_, a testament contrary to the
natural duty of the parent. And it is remarkable under what colour the
children were to move for relief in such a case: by suggesting that
the parent had lost the use of his reason, when he made the
_inofficious_ testament. And this, as Puffendorf observes[f], was not
to bring into dispute the testator's power of disinheriting his own
offspring; but to examine the motives upon which he did it: and, if
they were found defective in reason, then to set them aside. But
perhaps this is going rather too far: every man has, or ought to have,
by the laws of society, a power over his own property: and, as Grotius
very well distinguishes[g], natural right obliges to give a
_necessary_ maintenance to children; but what is more than that, they
have no other right to, than as it is given them by the favour of
their parents, or the positive constitutions of the municipal law.

[Footnote d: _Ff._ 25. 3. 5.]

[Footnote e: _Nov._ 115.]

[Footnote f: _l._ 4. _c._ 11. §. 7.]

[Footnote g: _De j.b. & p._ _l._ 2. _c._ 7. _n._ 3.]

LET us next see what provision our own laws have made for this natural
duty. It is a principle of law[h], that there is an obligation on
every man to provide for those descended from his loins: and the
manner, in which this obligation shall be performed, is thus pointed
out[i]. The father, and mother, grandfather, and grandmother of poor
impotent persons shall maintain them at their own charges, if of
sufficient ability, according as the quarter sessions shall direct:
and[k] if a parent runs away, and leaves his children, the
churchwardens and overseers of the parish shall seise his rents,
goods, and chattels, and dispose of them towards their relief. By the
interpretations which the courts of law have made upon these statutes,
if a mother or grandmother marries again, and was before such second
marriage of sufficient ability to keep the child, the husband shall be
charged to maintain it[l]: for this being a debt of hers, when
single, shall like others extend to charge the husband. But at her
death, the relation being dissolved, the husband is under no farther
obligation.

[Footnote h: Raym. 500.]

[Footnote i: Stat. 43 Eliz. c. 2.]

[Footnote k: Stat. 5 Geo. I. c. 8.]

[Footnote l: Styles. 283. 2 Bulstr. 346.]

NO person is bound to provide a maintenance for his issue, unless
where the children are impotent and unable to work, either through
infancy, disease, or accident; and then is only obliged to find them
with necessaries, the penalty on refusal being no more than 20_s._ a
month. For the policy of our laws, which are ever watchful to promote
industry, did not mean to compel a father to maintain his idle and
lazy children in ease and indolence: but thought it unjust to oblige
the parent, against his will, to provide them with superfluities, and
other indulgences of fortune; imagining they might trust to the
impulse of nature, if the children were deserving of such favours.
Yet, as nothing is so apt to stifle the calls of nature as religious
bigotry, it is enacted[m], that if any popish parent shall refuse to
allow his protestant child a fitting maintenance, with a view to
compel him to change his religion, the lord chancellor shall by order
of court constrain him to do what is just and reasonable. But this did
not extend to persons of another religion, of no less bitterness and
bigotry than the popish: and therefore in the very next year we find
an instance of a Jew of immense riches, whose only daughter having
embraced christianity, he turned her out of doors; and on her
application for relief, it was held she was intitled to none[n]. But
this gave occasion[o] to another statute[p], which ordains, that if
jewish parents refuse to allow their protestant children a fitting
maintenance, suitable to the fortune of the parent, the lord
chancellor on complaint may make such order therein as he shall see
proper.

[Footnote m: Stat. 11 & 12 W. III. c. 4.]

[Footnote n: Lord Raym. 699.]

[Footnote o: Com. Journ. 18 Feb. 12 Mar. 1701.]

[Footnote p: 1 Ann. st. 1. c. 30.]

OUR law has made no provision to prevent the disinheriting of children
by will; leaving every man's property in his own disposal, upon a
principle of liberty in this, as well as every other, action: though
perhaps it had not been amiss, if the parent had been bound to leave
them at the least a necessary subsistence. By the custom of London
indeed, (which was formerly universal throughout the kingdom) the
children of freemen are entitled to one third of their father's
effects, to be equally divided among them; of which he cannot deprive
them. And, among persons of any rank or fortune, a competence is
generally provided for younger children, and the bulk of the estate
settled upon the eldest, by the marriage-articles. Heirs also, and
children, are favourites of our courts of justice, and cannot be
disinherited by any dubious or ambiguous words; there being required
the utmost certainty of the testator's intentions to take away the
right of an heir[q].

[Footnote q: 1 Lev. 130.]

FROM the duty of maintenance we may easily pass to that of
_protection_; which is also a natural duty, but rather permitted than
enjoined by any municipal laws: nature, in this respect, working so
strongly as to need rather a check than a spur. A parent may, by our
laws, maintain and uphold his children in their lawsuits, without
being guilty of the legal crime of maintaining quarrels[r]. A parent
may also justify an assault and battery in defence of the persons of
his children[s]: nay, where a man's son was beaten by another boy, and
the father went near a mile to find him, and there revenged his son's
quarrel by beating the other boy, of which beating he afterwards died;
it was not held to be murder, but manslaughter merely[t]. Such
indulgence does the law shew to the frailty of human nature, and the
workings of parental affection.

[Footnote r: 2 Inst. 564.]

[Footnote s: 1 Hawk. P.C. 131.]

[Footnote t: Cro. Jac. 296. 1 Hawk. P.C. 83.]

THE last duty of parents to their children is that of giving them an
_education_ suitable to their station in life: a duty pointed out by
reason, and of far the greatest importance of any. For, as Puffendorf
very well observes[u], it is not easy to imagine or allow, that a
parent has conferred any considerable benefit upon his child, by
bringing him into the world; if he afterwards entirely neglects his
culture and education, and suffers him to grow up like a mere beast,
to lead a life useless to others, and shameful to himself. Yet the
municipal laws of most countries seem to be defective in this point,
by not constraining the parent to bestow a proper education upon his
children. Perhaps they thought it punishment enough to leave the
parent, who neglects the instruction of his family, to labour under
those griefs and inconveniences, which his family, so uninstructed,
will be sure to bring upon him. Our laws, though their defects in this
particular cannot be denied, have in one instance made a wise
provision for breeding up the rising generation; since the poor and
laborious part of the community, when past the age of nurture, are
taken out of the hands of their parents, by the statutes for
apprenticing poor children[w]; and are placed out by the public in
such a manner, as may render their abilities, in their several
stations, of the greatest advantage to the commonwealth. The rich
indeed are left at their own option, whether they will breed up their
children to be ornaments or disgraces to their family. Yet in one
case, that of religion, they are under peculiar restrictions: for[x]
it is provided, that if any person sends any child under his
government beyond the seas, either to prevent it's good education in
England, or in order to enter into or reside in any popish college, or
to be instructed, persuaded, or strengthened in the popish religion;
in such case, besides the disabilities incurred by the child so sent,
the parent or person sending shall forfeit 100_l._ which[y] shall go
to the sole use and benefit of him that shall discover the offence.
And[z] if any parent, or other, shall send or convey any person beyond
sea, to enter into, or be resident in, or trained up in, any priory,
abbey, nunnery, popish university, college, or school, or house of
jesuits, or priests, or in any private popish family, in order to be
instructed, persuaded, or confirmed in the popish religion; or shall
contribute any thing towards their maintenance when abroad by any
pretext whatever, the person both sending and sent shall be disabled
to sue in law or equity, or to be executor or administrator to any
person, or to enjoy any legacy or deed of gift, or to bear any office
in the realm, and shall forfeit all his goods and chattels, and
likewise all his real estate for life.

[Footnote u: L. of N. b. 6. c. 2. §. 12.]

[Footnote w: See page 414.]

[Footnote x: Stat. 1 Jac. I. c. 4. & 3 Jac. I. c. 5.]

[Footnote y: Stat. 11 & 12 W. III. c. 4.]

[Footnote z: Stat. 3 Car. I. c. 2.]

2. THE _power_ of parents over their children is derived from the
former consideration, their duty; this authority being given them,
partly to enable the parent more effectually to perform his duty, and
partly as a recompence for his care and trouble in the faithful
discharge of it. And upon this score the municipal laws of some
nations have given a much larger authority to the parents, than
others. The antient Roman laws gave the father a power of life and
death over his children; upon this principle, that he who gave had
also the power of taking away[a]. But the rigor of these laws was
softened by subsequent constitutions; so that[b] we find a father
banished by the emperor Hadrian for killing his son, though he had
committed a very heinous crime, upon this maxim, that "_patria
potestas in pietate debet, non in atrocitate, consistere_." But still
they maintained to the last a very large and absolute authority: for a
son could not acquire any property of his own during the life of his
father; but all his acquisitions belonged to the father, or at least
the profits of them for his life[c].

[Footnote a: _Ff._ 28. 2. 11. _Cod._ 8. 47. 10.]

[Footnote b: _Ff._ 48. 9. 5.]

[Footnote c: _Inst._ 2. 9. 1.]

THE power of a parent by our English laws is much more moderate; but
still sufficient to keep the child in order and obedience. He may
lawfully correct his child, being under age, in a reasonable
manner[d]; for this is for the benefit of his education. The consent
or concurrence of the parent to the marriage of his child under age,
was also _directed_ by our antient law to be obtained: but now it is
absolutely _necessary_; for without it the contract is void[e]. And
this also is another means, which the law has put into the parent's
hands, in order the better to discharge his duty; first, of
protecting his children from the snares of artful and designing
persons; and, next, of settling them properly in life, by preventing
the ill consequences of too early and precipitate marriages. A father
has no other power over his sons _estate_, than as his trustee or
guardian; for, though he may receive the profits during the child's
minority, yet he must account for them when he comes of age. He may
indeed have the benefit of his children's labour while they live with
him, and are maintained by him: but this is no more than he is
entitled to from his apprentices or servants. The legal power of a
father (for a mother, as such, is entitled to no power, but only to
reverence and respect) the power of a father, I say, over the persons
of his children ceases at the age of twenty one: for they are then
enfranchised by arriving at years of discretion, or that point which
the law has established (as some must necessarily be established) when
the empire of the father, or other guardian, gives place to the empire
of reason. Yet, till that age arrives, this empire of the father
continues even after his death; for he may by his will appoint a
guardian to his children. He may also delegate part of his parental
authority, during his life, to the tutor or schoolmaster of his child;
who is then _in loco parentis_, and has such a portion of the power of
the parent committed to his charge, viz. that of restraint and
correction, as may be necessary to answer the purposes for which he is
employed.

[Footnote d: 1 Hawk. P.C. 130.]

[Footnote e: Stat. 26 Geo. II. c. 33.]

3. THE _duties_ of children to their parents arise from a principle of
natural justice and retribution. For to those, who gave us existence,
we naturally owe subjection and obedience during our minority, and
honour and reverence ever after; they, who protected the weakness of
our infancy, are entitled to our protection in the infirmity of their
age; they who by sustenance and education have enabled their offspring
to prosper, ought in return to be supported by that offspring, in case
they stand in need of assistance. Upon this principle proceed all the
duties of children to their parents, which are enjoined by positive
laws. And the Athenian laws[f] carried this principle into practice
with a scrupulous kind of nicety: obliging all children to provide for
their father, when fallen into poverty; with an exception to spurious
children, to those whose chastity had been prostituted by consent of
the father, and to those whom he had not put in any way of gaining a
livelyhood. The legislature, says baron Montesquieu[g], considered,
that in the first case the father, being uncertain, had rendered the
natural obligation precarious; that, in the second case, he had
sullied the life he had given, and done his children the greatest of
injuries, in depriving them of their reputation; and that, in the
third case, he had rendered their life (so far as in him lay) an
insupportable burthen, by furnishing them with no means of
subsistence.

[Footnote f: Potter's Antiq. b. 4. c. 15.]

[Footnote g: Sp. L. l. 26. c. 5.]

OUR laws agree with those of Athens with regard to the first only of
these particulars, the case of spurious issue. In the other cases the
law does not hold the tie of nature to be dissolved by any
misbehaviour of the parent; and therefore a child is equally
justifiable in defending the person, or maintaining the cause or suit,
of a bad parent, as a good one; and is equally compellable[h], if of
sufficient ability, to maintain and provide for a wicked and unnatural
progenitor, as for one who has shewn the greatest tenderness and
parental piety.

[Footnote h: Stat. 43 Eliz. c. 2.]

II. WE are next to consider the case of illegitimate children, or
bastards; with regard to whom let us inquire, 1. Who are bastards. 2.
The legal duties of the parents towards a bastard child. 3. The rights
and incapacities attending such bastard children.

1. WHO are bastards. A bastard, by our English laws, is one that is
not only begotten, but born, out of lawful matrimony. The civil and
canon laws do not allow a child to remain a bastard, if the parents
afterwards intermarry[i]: and herein they differ most materially from
our law; which, though not so strict as to require that the child
shall be _begotten_, yet makes it an indispensable condition that it
shall be _born_, after lawful wedlock. And the reason of our English
law is surely much superior to that of the Roman, if we consider the
principal end and design of establishing the contract of marriage,
taken in a civil light; abstractedly from any religious view, which
has nothing to do with the legitimacy or illegitimacy of the children.
The main end and design of marriage therefore being to ascertain and
fix upon some certain person, to whom the care, the protection, the
maintenance, and the education of the children should belong; this end
is undoubtedly better answered by legitimating all issue born after
wedlock, than by legitimating all issue of the same parties, even born
before wedlock, so as wedlock afterwards ensues: 1. Because of the
very great uncertainty there will generally be, in the proof that the
issue was really begotten by the same man; whereas, by confining the
proof to the birth, and not to the begetting, our law has rendered it
perfectly certain, what child is legitimate, and who is to take care
of the child. 2. Because by the Roman laws a child may be continued a
bastard, or made legitimate, at the option of the father and mother,
by a marriage _ex post facto_; thereby opening a door to many frauds
and partialities, which by our law are prevented. 3. Because by those
laws a man may remain a bastard till forty years of age, and then
become legitimate, by the subsequent marriage of his parents; whereby
the main end of marriage, the protection of infants, is totally
frustrated. 4. Because this rule of the Roman laws admits of no
limitations as to the time, or number, of bastards so to be
legitimated; but a dozen of them may, twenty years after their birth,
by the subsequent marriage of their parents, be admitted to all the
privileges of legitimate children. This is plainly a great
discouragement to the matrimonial state; to which one main inducement
is usually not only the desire of having _children_, but also the
desire of procreating lawful _heirs_. Whereas our constitutions guard
against this indecency, and at the same time give sufficient allowance
to the frailties of human nature. For, if a child be begotten while
the parents are single, and they will endeavour to make an early
reparation for the offence, by marrying within a few months after, our
law is so indulgent as not to bastardize the child, if it be born,
though not begotten, in lawful wedlock: for this is an incident that
can happen but once; since all future children will be begotten, as
well as born, within the rules of honour and civil society. Upon
reasons like these we may suppose the peers to have acted at the
parliament of Merton, when they refused to enact that children born
before marriage should be esteemed legitimate[k].

[Footnote i: _Inst._ 1. 10. 13. _Decretal._ _l._ 4. _t._ 17. _c._ 1.]

[Footnote k: _Rogaverunt omnes episcopi magnates, ut consentirent quod
nati ante matrimonium essent legitimi, sicut illi qui nati sunt post
matrimonium, quia ecclesia tales habet pro legitimis. Et omnes comites
et barones una voce responderunt, quod nolunt leges Angliae mutare,
quae hucusque usitatae sunt et approbatae._ Stat. 20 Hen. III. c. 9.
See the introduction to the great charter, _edit. Oxon._ 1759. _sub
anno_ 1253.]

FROM what has been said it appears, that all children born before
matrimony are bastards by our law; and so it is of all children born
so long after the death of the husband, that, by the usual course of
gestation, they could not be begotten by him. But, this being a matter
of some uncertainty, the law is not exact as to a few days[l]. And
this gives occasion to a proceeding at common law, where a widow is
suspected to feign herself with child, in order to produce a
supposititious heir to the estate: an attempt which the rigor of the
Gothic constitutions esteemed equivalent to the most atrocious theft,
and therefore punished with death[m]. In this case with us the heir
presumptive may have a writ _de ventre inspiciendo_, to examine
whether she be with child, or not[n]; which is entirely conformable to
the practice of the civil law[o]: and, if the widow be upon due
examination found not pregnant, any issue she may afterwards produce,
though within nine months, will be bastard. But if a man dies, and his
widow soon after marries again, and a child is born within such a
time, as that by the course of nature it might have been the child of
either husband; in this case he is said to be more than ordinarily
legitimate; for he may, when he arrives to years of discretion,
choose which of the fathers he pleases[p]. To prevent this, among
other inconveniences, the civil law ordained that no widow should
marry _infra annum luctus_[q]; a rule which obtained so early as the
reign of Augustus[r], if not of Romulus: and the same constitution was
probably handed down to our early ancestors from the Romans, during
their stay in this island; for we find it established under the Saxon
and Danish governments[s].

[Footnote l: Cro. Jac. 541.]

[Footnote m: Stiernhook _de jure Gothor._ _l._ 3. _c._ 5.]

[Footnote n: Co. Litt. 8.]

[Footnote o: _Ff._ 25. _tit._ 4. _per tot._]

[Footnote p: Co. Litt. 8.]

[Footnote q: _Cod._ 5. 9. 2.]

[Footnote r: But the year was then only _ten_ months. Ovid. Fast. I.
27.]

[Footnote s: _Sit omnis vidua sine marito duodecim menses._ _LL.
Ethelr._ _A.D._ 1008. _LL. Canut._ _c._ 71.]

AS bastards may be born before the coverture, or marriage state, is
begun, or after it is determined, so also children born during wedlock
may in some circumstances be bastards. As if the husband be out of the
kingdom of England (or, as the law somewhat loosely phrases it, _extra
quatuor maria_) for above nine months, so that no access to his wife
can be presumed, her issue during that period shall be bastard[t].
But, generally, during the coverture access of the husband shall be
presumed, unless the contrary can be shewn[u]; which is such a
negative as can only be proved by shewing him to be elsewhere: for the
general rule is, _praesumitur pro legitimatione_[w]. In a divorce _a
mensa et thoro_, if the wife breeds children, they are bastards; for
the law will presume the husband and wife conformable to the sentence
of separation, unless access be proved: but, in a voluntary separation
by agreement, the law will suppose access, unless the negative be
shewn[x]. So also if there is an apparent impossibility of procreation
on the part of the husband, as if he be only eight years old, or the
like, there the issue of the wife shall be bastard[y]. Likewise, in
case of divorce in the spiritual court _a vinculo matrimonii_, all the
issue born during the coverture are bastards[z]; because such divorce
is always upon some cause, that rendered the marriage unlawful and
null from the beginning.

[Footnote t: Co. Litt. 244.]

[Footnote u: Salk. 123. 3 P.W. 276. Stra. 925.]

[Footnote w: 5 Rep. 98.]

[Footnote x: Salk. 123.]

[Footnote y: Co. Litt. 244.]

[Footnote z: _Ibid._ 235.]

2. LET us next see the duty of parents to their bastard children, by
our law; which is principally that of maintenance. For, though
bastards are not looked upon as children to any civil purposes, yet
the ties of nature, of which maintenance is one, are not so easily
dissolved: and they hold indeed as to many other intentions; as,
particularly, that a man shall not marry his bastard sister or
daughter[a]. The civil law therefore, when it denied maintenance to
bastards begotten under certain atrocious circumstances[b], was
neither consonant to nature, nor reason, however profligate and wicked
the parents might justly be esteemed.

[Footnote a: Lord Raym. 68. Comb. 356.]

[Footnote b: _Nov._ 89. _c._ 15.]

THE method in which the English law provides maintenance for them is
as follows[c]. When a woman is delivered, or declares herself with
child, of a bastard, and will by oath before a justice of peace charge
any person having got her with child, the justice shall cause such
person to be apprehended, and commit him till he gives security,
either to maintain the child, or appear at the next quarter sessions
to dispute and try the fact. But if the woman dies, or is married
before delivery, or miscarries, or proves not to have been with child,
the person shall be discharged: otherwise the sessions, or two
justices out of sessions, upon original application to them, may take
order for the keeping of the bastard, by charging the mother, or the
reputed father with the payment of money or other sustentation for
that purpose. And if such putative father, or lewd mother, run away
from the parish, the overseers by direction of two justices may seize
their rents, goods, and chattels, in order to bring up the said
bastard child. Yet such is the humanity of our laws, that no woman can
be compulsively questioned concerning the father of her child, till
one month after her delivery: which indulgence is however very
frequently a hardship upon parishes, by suffering the parents to
escape.

[Footnote c: Stat. 18 Eliz. c. 3. 7 Jac. I. c. 4. 3 Car. I. c. 4. 13 &
14 Car. II. c. 12. 6 Geo. II. c. 31.]

3. I PROCEED next to the rights and incapacities which appertain to a
bastard. The rights are very few, being only such as he can _acquire_;
for he can _inherit_ nothing, being looked upon as the son of nobody,
and sometimes called _filius nullius_, sometimes _filius populi_[d].
Yet he may gain a sirname by reputation[e], though he has none by
inheritance. All other children have a settlement in their father's
parish; but a bastard in the parish where born, for he hath no
father[f]. However, in case of fraud, as if a woman be sent either by
order of justices, or comes to beg as a vagrant, to a parish which she
does not belong to, and drops her bastard there; the bastard shall, in
the first case, be settled in the parish from whence she was illegally
removed[g]; or, in the latter case, in the mother's own parish, if the
mother be apprehended for her vagrancy[h]. The incapacity of a bastard
consists principally in this, that he cannot be heir to any one,
neither can he have heirs, but of his own body; for, being _nullius
filius_, he is therefore of kin to nobody, and has no ancestor from
whom any inheritable blood can be derived. A bastard was also, in
strictness, incapable of holy orders; and, though that were dispensed
with, yet he was utterly disqualified from holding any dignity in the
church[i]: but this doctrine seems now obsolete; and in all other
respects, there is no distinction between a bastard and another man.
And really any other distinction, but that of not inheriting, which
civil policy renders necessary, would, with regard to the innocent
offspring of his parents' crimes, be odious, unjust, and cruel to the
last degree: and yet the civil law, so boasted of for it's equitable
decisions, made bastards in some cases incapable even of a gift from
their parents[k]. A bastard may, lastly, be made legitimate, and
capable of inheriting, by the transcendent power of an act of
parliament, and not otherwise[l]: as was done in the case of John of
Gant's bastard children, by a statute of Richard the second.

[Footnote d: _Fort. de LL._ _c._ 40.]

[Footnote e: Co. Litt. 3.]

[Footnote f: Salk. 427.]

[Footnote g: Salk. 121.]

[Footnote h: Stat. 17 Geo. II. c. 5.]

[Footnote i: Fortesc. _c._ 40. 5 Rep. 58.]

[Footnote k: _Cod._ 6. 57. 5.]

[Footnote l: 4 Inst. 36.]




CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH.

OF GUARDIAN AND WARD.


THE only general private relation, now remaining to be discussed, is
that of guardian and ward; which bears a very near resemblance to the
last, and is plainly derived out of it: the guardian being only a
temporary parent; that is, for so long time as the ward is an infant,
or under age. In examining this species of relationship, I shall first
consider the different kinds of guardians, how they are appointed, and
their power and duty: next, the different ages of persons, as defined
by the law: and, lastly, the privileges and disabilities of an infant,
or one under age and subject to guardianship.

1. THE guardian with us performs the office both of the _tutor_ and
_curator_ of the Roman laws; the former of which had the charge of the
maintenance and education of the minor, the latter the care of his
fortune; or, according to the language of the court of chancery, the
_tutor_ was the committee of the person, the _curator_ the committee
of the estate. But this office was frequently united in the civil
law[a]; as it is always in our law with regard to minors, though as to
lunatics and idiots it is commonly kept distinct.

[Footnote a: _Ff._ 26. 4. 1.]

OF the several species of guardians, the first are guardians _by
nature_: viz. the father and (in some cases) the mother of the child.
For, if an estate be left to an infant, the father is by common law
the guardian, and must account to his child for the profits[b]. And,
with regard to daughters, it seems by construction of the statute 4 &
5 Ph. & Mar. c. 8. that the father might by deed or will assign a
guardian to any woman-child under the age of sixteen, and if none be
so assigned, the mother shall in this case be guardian[c]. There are
also guardians _for nurture_[d], which are, of course, the father or
mother, till the infant attains the age of fourteen years[e]: and, in
default of father or mother, the ordinary usually assigns some
discreet person to take care of the infant's personal estate, and to
provide for his maintenance and education[f]. Next are guardians _in
socage_, (an appellation which will be fully explained in the second
book of these commentaries) who are also called guardians _by the
common law_. These take place only when the minor is entitled to some
estate in lands, and then by the common law the guardianship devolves
upon his next of kin, to whom the inheritance cannot possibly descend;
as, where the estate descended from his father, in this case his uncle
by the mother's side cannot possibly inherit this estate, and
therefore shall be the guardian[g]. For the law judges it improper to
trust the person of an infant in his hands, who may by possibility
become heir to him; that there may be no temptation, nor even
suspicion of temptation, for him to abuse his trust[h]. The Roman laws
proceed on a quite contrary principle, committing the care of the
minor to him who is the next to succeed to the inheritance, presuming
that the next heir would take the best care of an estate, to which he
has a prospect of succeeding: and this they boast to be "_summa
providentia_[i]." But in the mean time they forget, how much it is
the guardian's interest to remove the incumbrance of his pupil's life
from that estate, for which he is supposed to have so great a
regard[k]. And this affords Fortescue[l], and sir Edward Coke[m], an
ample opportunity for triumph; they affirming, that to commit the
custody of an infant to him that is next in succession, is "_quasi
agnum committere lupo, ad devorandum_[n]." These guardians in socage,
like those for nurture, continue only till the minor is fourteen years
of age; for then, in both cases, he is presumed to have discretion, so
far as to choose his own guardian. This he may do, unless one be
appointed by father, by virtue of the statute 12 Car. II. c. 24.
which, considering the imbecillity of judgment in children of the age
of fourteen, and the abolition of guardianship _in chivalry_ (which
lasted till the age of twenty one, and of which we shall speak
hereafter) enacts, that any father, under age or of full age, may by
deed or will dispose of the custody of his child, either born or
unborn, to any person, except a popish recusant, either in possession
or reversion, till such child attains the age of one and twenty years.
These are called guardians _by statute_, or _testamentary_ guardians.
There are also special guardians _by custom_ of London, and other
places[o]; but they are particular exceptions, and do not fall under
the general law.

[Footnote b: Co. Litt. 88.]

[Footnote c: 3 Rep. 39.]

[Footnote d: Co. Litt. 88.]

[Footnote e: Moor. 738. 3 Rep. 38.]

[Footnote f: 2 Jones 90. 2 Lev. 163.]

[Footnote g: Litt. §. 123.]

[Footnote h: _Nunquam custodia alicujus de jure alicui remanet, de quo
habeatur suspicio, quod possit vel velit aliquod jus in ipsa
hereditate clamare._ Glanv. _l._ 7. _c._ 11.]

[Footnote i: _Ff._ 26. 4. 1.]

[Footnote k: The Roman satyrist was fully aware of this danger, when
he puts this private prayer into the mouth of a selfish guardian;

     _Pupillum o utinam, quem proximus haeres
     Impello, expungam._ Perf. 1. 12.]

[Footnote l: _c._ 44.]

[Footnote m: 1 Inst. 88.]

[Footnote n: This policy of our English law is warranted by the wise
institutions of Solon, who provided that no one should be another's
guardian, who was to enjoy the estate after his death. (Potter's
Antiqu. l. 1. c. 26.) And Charondas, another of the Grecian
legislators, directed that the inheritance should go to the father's
relations, but the education of the child to the mother's; that the
guardianship and right of succession might always be kept distinct.
(Petit. _Leg. Att._ _l._ 6. _t._ 7.)]

[Footnote o: Co. Litt. 88.]

THE power and reciprocal duty of a guardian and ward are the same,
_pro tempore_, as that of a father and child; and therefore I shall
not repeat them: but shall only add, that the guardian, when the ward
comes of age, is bound to give him an account of all that he has
transacted on his behalf, and must answer for all losses by his wilful
default or negligence. In order therefore to prevent disagreeable
contests with young gentlemen, it has become a practice for many
guardians, of large estates especially, to indemnify themselves by
applying to the court of chancery, acting under it's direction, and
accounting annually before the officers of that court. For the lord
chancellor is, by right derived from the crown, the general and
supreme guardian of all infants, as well as idiots and lunatics; that
is, of all such persons as have not discretion enough to manage their
own concerns. In case therefore any guardian abuses his trust, the
court will check and punish him; nay sometimes proceed to the removal
of him, and appoint another in his stead[p].

[Footnote p: 1 Sid. 424. 1 P. Will. 703.]

2. LET us next consider the ward, or person within age, for whose
assistance and support these guardians are constituted by law; or who
it is, that is said to be within age. The ages of male and female are
different for different purposes. A male at _twelve_ years old may
take the oath of allegiance; at _fourteen_ is at years of discretion,
and therefore may consent or disagree to marriage, may choose his
guardian, and, if his discretion be actually proved, may make his
testament of his personal estate; at _seventeen_ may be an executor;
and at _twenty one_ is at his own disposal, and may aliene his lands,
goods, and chattels. A female also at _seven_ years of age may be
betrothed or given in marriage; at _nine_ is entitled to dower; at
_twelve_ is at years of maturity, and therefore may consent or
disagree to marriage, and, if proved to have sufficient discretion,
may bequeath her personal estate; at _fourteen_ is at years of legal
discretion, and may choose a guardian; at _seventeen_ may be
executrix; and at _twenty one_ may dispose of herself and her lands.
So that full age in male or female, is twenty one years, which age is
completed on the day preceding the anniversary of a person's birth[q];
who till that time is an infant, and so stiled in law. Among the
antient Greeks and Romans _women_ were never of age, but subject to
perpetual guardianship[r], unless when married, "_nisi convenissent in
manum viri_:" and, when that perpetual tutelage wore away in process
of time, we find that, in females as well as males, full age was not
till twenty five years[s]. Thus, by the constitutions of different
kingdoms, this period, which is merely arbitrary, and _juris
positivi_, is fixed at different times. Scotland agrees with England
in this point; (both probably copying from the old Saxon constitutions
on the continent, which extended the age of minority "_ad annum
vigesimum primum, et eo usque juvenes sub tutelam reponunt_[t]") but
in Naples they are of full age at _eighteen_; in France, with regard
to marriage, not till _thirty_; and in Holland at _twenty five_.

[Footnote q: Salk. 44. 625.]

[Footnote r: Pott. Antiq. l. 4. c. 11. Cic. _pro Muren._ 12.]

[Footnote s: _Inst._ 1. 23. 1.]

[Footnote t: Stiernhook _de jure Sueonum._ _l._ 2. _c._ 2. This is
also the period when the king, as well as the subject, arrives at full
age in modern Sweden. Mod. Un. Hist. xxxiii. 220.]

3. INFANTS have various privileges, and various disabilities: but
their very disabilities are privileges; in order to secure them from
hurting themselves by their own improvident acts. An infant cannot be
sued but under the protection, and joining the name, of his guardian;
for he is to defend him against all attacks as well by law as
otherwise[u]: but he may sue either by his guardian, or _prochein
amy_, his next friend who is not his guardian. This _prochein amy_ may
be any person who will undertake the infant's cause; and it frequently
happens, that an infant, by his _prochein amy_, institutes a suit in
equity against a fraudulent guardian. In criminal cases, an infant of
the age of _fourteen_ years may be capitally punished for any capital
offence[w]: but under the age of _seven_ he cannot. The period between
_seven_ and _fourteen_ is subject to much incertainty: for the infant
shall, generally speaking, be judged _prima facie_ innocent; yet if he
was _doli capax_, and could discern between good and evil at the time
of the offence committed, he may be convicted and undergo judgment and
execution of death, though he hath not attained to years of puberty
or discretion[x]. And sir Matthew Hale gives us two instances, one of
a girl of thirteen, who was burned for killing her mistress; another
of a boy still younger, that had killed his companion, and hid
himself, who was hanged; for it appeared by his hiding that he knew he
had done wrong, and could discern between good and evil; and in such
cases the maxim of law is, that _malitia supplet aetatem_.

[Footnote u: Co. Litt. 135.]

[Footnote w: 1 Hal. P.C. 25.]

[Footnote x: 1 Hal. P.C. 26.]

WITH regard to estates and civil property, an infant hath many
privileges, which will be better understood when we come to treat more
particularly of those matters: but this may be said in general, that
an infant shall lose nothing by non-claim, or neglect of demanding his
right; nor shall any other _laches_ or negligence be imputed to an
infant, except in some very particular cases.

IT is generally true, that an infant can neither aliene his lands, nor
do any legal act, nor make a deed, nor indeed any manner of contract,
that will bind him. But still to all these rules there are some
exceptions; part of which were just now mentioned in reckoning up the
different capacities which they assume at different ages: and there
are others, a few of which it may not be improper to recite, as a
general specimen of the whole. And, first, it is true, that infants
cannot aliene their estates: but[y] infant trustees, or mortgagees,
are enabled to convey, under the direction of the court of chancery or
exchequer, the estates they hold in trust or mortgage, to such person
as the court shall appoint. Also it is generally true, that an infant
can do no legal act: yet an infant who has an advowson, may present to
the benefice when it becomes void[z]. For the law in this case
dispenses with one rule, in order to maintain others of far greater
consequence: it permits an infant to present a clerk (who, if unfit,
may be rejected by the bishop) rather than either suffer the church to
be unserved till he comes of age, or permit the infant to be debarred
of his right by lapse to the bishop. An infant may also purchase
lands, but his purchase is incomplete: for, when he comes to age, he
may either agree or disagree to it, as he thinks prudent or proper,
without alleging any reason; and so may his heirs after him, if he
dies without having completed his agreement[a]. It is, farther,
generally true, that an infant, under twenty one, can make no deed
that is of any force or effect: yet[b] he may bind himself apprentice
by deed indented, or indentures, for seven years; and[c] he may by
deed or will appoint a guardian to his children, if he has any.
Lastly, it is generally true, that an infant can make no other
contract that will bind him: yet he may bind himself to pay for his
necessary meat, drink, apparel, physic, and such other necessaries;
and likewise for his good teaching and instruction, whereby he may
profit himself afterwards[d]. And thus much, at present, for the
privileges and disabilities of infants.

[Footnote y: Stat. 7 Ann. c. 19.]

[Footnote z: Co. Litt. 172.]

[Footnote a: Co. Litt. 2.]

[Footnote b: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 4.]

[Footnote c: Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 24.]

[Footnote d: Co. Litt. 172.]




CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

OF CORPORATIONS.


WE have hitherto considered persons in their natural capacities, and
have treated of their rights and duties. But, as all personal rights
die with the person; and, as the necessary forms of investing a series
of individuals, one after another, with the same identical rights,
would be very inconvenient, if not impracticable; it has been found
necessary, when it is for the advantage of the public to have any
particular rights kept on foot and continued, to constitute artificial
persons, who may maintain a perpetual succession, and enjoy a kind of
legal immortality.

THESE artificial persons are called bodies politic, bodies corporate,
(_corpora corporata_) or corporations: of which there is a great
variety subsisting, for the advancement of religion, of learning, and
of commerce; in order to preserve entire and for ever those rights and
immunities, which, if they were granted only to those individuals of
which the body corporate is composed, would upon their death be
utterly lost and extinct. To shew the advantages of these
incorporations, let us consider the case of a college in either of our
universities, founded _ad studendum et orandum_, for the encouragement
and support of religion and learning. If this was a mere voluntary
assembly, the individuals which compose it might indeed read, pray,
study, and perform scholastic exercises together, so long as they
could agree to do so: but they could neither frame, nor receive, any
laws or rules of their conduct; none at least, which would have any
binding force, for want of a coercive power to create a sufficient
obligation. Neither could they be capable of retaining any privileges
or immunities: for, if such privileges be attacked, which of all this
unconnected assembly has the right, or ability, to defend them? And,
when they are dispersed by death or otherwise, how shall they transfer
these advantages to another set of students, equally unconnected as
themselves? So also, with regard to holding estates or other property,
if land be granted for the purposes of religion or learning to twenty
individuals not incorporated, there is no legal way of continuing the
property to any other persons for the same purposes, but by endless
conveyances from one to the other, as often as the hands are changed.
But, when they are consolidated and united into a corporation, they
and their successors are then considered as one person in law: as one
person, they have one will, which is collected from the sense of the
majority of the individuals: this one will may establish rules and
orders for the regulation of the whole, which are a sort of municipal
laws of this little republic; or rules and statutes may be prescribed
to it at it's creation, which are then in the place of natural laws:
the privileges and immunities, the estates and possessions, of the
corporation, when once vested in them, will be for ever vested,
without any new conveyance to new successions; for all the individual
members that have existed from the foundation to the present time, or
that shall ever hereafter exist, are but one person in law, a person
that never dies: in like manner as the river Thames is still the same
river, though the parts which compose it are changing every instant.

THE honour of originally inventing these political constitutions
entirely belongs to the Romans. They were introduced, as Plutarch
says, by Numa; who finding, upon his accession, the city torn to
pieces by the two rival factions of Sabines, and Romans, thought it a
prudent and politic measure, to subdivide these two into many smaller
ones, by instituting separate societies of every manual trade and
profession. They were afterwards much considered by the civil law[a],
in which they were called _universitates_, as forming one whole out of
many individuals; or _collegia_, from being gathered together: they
were adopted also by the canon law, for the maintenance of
ecclesiastical discipline; and from them our spiritual corporations
are derived. But our laws have considerably refined and improved upon
the invention, according to the usual genius of the English nation:
particularly with regard to sole corporations, consisting of one
person only, of which the Roman lawyers had no notion; their maxim
being that "_tres faciunt collegium_[b]." Though they held, that if a
corporation, originally consisting of three persons, be reduced to
one, "_si universitas ad unum redit_," it may still subsist as a
corporation, "_et stet nomen universitatis_[c]."

[Footnote a: _Ff._ _l._ 3. _t._ 4. _per tot._]

[Footnote b: _Ff._ 50. 16. 85.]

[Footnote c: _Ff._ 3. 4. 7.]

BEFORE we proceed to treat of the several incidents of corporations,
as regarded by the laws of England, let us first take a view of the
several sorts of them; and then we shall be better enabled to
apprehend their respective qualities.

THE first division of corporations is into _aggregate_ and _sole_.
Corporations aggregate consist of many persons united together into
one society, and are kept up by a perpetual succession of members, so
as to continue for ever: of which kind are the mayor and commonalty of
a city, the head and fellows of a college, the dean and chapter of a
cathedral church. Corporations sole consist of one person only and his
successors, in some particular station, who are incorporated by law,
in order to give them some legal capacities and advantages,
particularly that of perpetuity, which in their natural persons they
could not have had. In this sense the king is a sole corporation[d]:
so is a bishop: so are some deans, and prebendaries, distinct from
their several chapters: and so is every parson and vicar. And the
necessity, or at least use, of this institution will be very apparent,
if we consider the case of a parson of a church. At the original
endowment of parish churches, the freehold of the church, the
church-yard, the parsonage house, the glebe, and the tithes of the
parish, were vested in the then parson by the bounty of the donor, as
a temporal recompence to him for his spiritual care of the
inhabitants, and with intent that the same emoluments should ever
afterwards continue as a recompense for the same care. But how was
this to be effected? The freehold was vested in the parson; and, if we
suppose it vested in his natural capacity, on his death it might
descend to his heir, and would be liable to his debts and
incumbrances: or, at best, the heir might be compellable, at some
trouble and expense, to convey these rights to the succeeding
incumbent. The law therefore has wisely ordained, that the parson,
_quatenus_ parson, shall never die, any more than the king; by making
him and his successors a corporation. By which means all the original
rights of the parsonage are preserved entire to the successor: for the
present incumbent, and his predecessor who lived seven centuries ago,
are in law one and the same person; and what was given to the one was
given to the other also.

[Footnote d: Co. Litt. 43.]

ANOTHER division of corporations, either sole or aggregate, is into
_ecclesiastical_ and _lay_. Ecclesiastical corporations are where the
members that compose it are entirely spiritual persons; such as
bishops; certain deans, and prebendaries; all archdeacons, parsons,
and vicars; which are sole corporations: deans and chapters at
present, and formerly prior and convent, abbot and monks, and the
like, bodies aggregate. These are erected for the furtherance of
religion, and the perpetuating the rights of the church. Lay
corporations are of two sorts, _civil_ and _eleemosynary_. The civil
are such as are erected for a variety of temporal purposes. The king,
for instance, is made a corporation to prevent in general the
possibility of an _interregnum_ or vacancy of the throne, and to
preserve the possessions of the crown entire; for, immediately upon
the demise of one king, his successor is, as we have formerly seen, in
full possession of the regal rights and dignity. Other lay
corporations are erected for the good government of a town or
particular district, as a mayor and commonalty, bailiff and burgesses,
or the like: some for the advancement and regulation of manufactures
and commerce; as the trading companies of London, and other towns: and
some for the better carrying on of divers special purposes; as
churchwardens, for conservation of the goods of the parish; the
college of physicians and company of surgeons in London, for the
improvement of the medical science; the royal society, for the
advancement of natural knowlege; and the society of antiquarians, for
promoting the study of antiquities. And among these I am inclined to
think the general corporate bodies of the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge must be ranked: for it is clear they are not spiritual or
ecclesiastical corporations, being composed of more laymen than
clergy: neither are they eleemosynary foundations, though stipends are
annexed to particular magistrates and professors, any more than other
corporations where the acting officers have standing salaries; for
these are rewards _pro opera et labore_, not charitable donations
only, since every stipend is preceded by service and duty: they seem
therefore to be merely civil corporations. The eleemosynary sort are
such as are constituted for the perpetual distribution of the free
alms, or bounty, of the founder of them to such persons as he has
directed. Of this kind are all hospitals for the maintenance of the
poor, sick, and impotent; and all colleges, both _in_ our universities
and _out_[e] of them: which colleges are founded for two purposes; 1.
For the promotion of piety and learning by proper regulations and
ordinances. 2. For imparting assistance to the members of those
bodies, in order to enable them to prosecute their devotion and
studies with greater ease and assiduity. And all these eleemosynary
corporations are, strictly speaking, lay and not ecclesiastical, even
though composed of ecclesiastical persons[f], and although they in
some things partake of the nature, privileges, and restrictions of
ecclesiastical bodies.

[Footnote e: Such as at Manchester, Eton, Winchester, &c.]

[Footnote f: 1 Lord Raym. 6.]

HAVING thus marshalled the several species of corporations, let us
next proceed to consider, 1. How corporations, in general, may be
created. 2. What are their powers, capacities, and incapacities. 3.
How corporations are visited. And 4. How they may be dissolved.

I. CORPORATIONS, by the civil law, seem to have been created by the
mere act, and voluntary association of their members; provided such
convention was not contrary to law, for then it was _illicitum
collegium_[g]. It does not appear that the prince's consent was
necessary to be actually given to the foundation of them; but merely
that the original founders of these voluntary and friendly societies
(for they were little more than such) should not establish any
meetings in opposition to the laws of the state.

[Footnote g: _Ff._ 47. 22. 1. _Neque societas, neque collegium, neque
hujusmodi corpus passim omnibus habere conceditur; nam et legibus, et
senatus consultis, et principalibus constitutionibus ea res
coercetur._ _Ff._ 3. 4. 1.]

BUT, with us in England, the king's consent is absolutely necessary to
the erection of any corporation, either impliedly or expressly given.
The king's implied consent is to be found in corporations which exist
by force of the _common law_, to which our former kings are supposed
to have given their concurrence; common law being nothing else but
custom, arising from the universal agreement of the whole community.
Of this sort are the king himself, all bishops, parsons, vicars,
churchwardens, and some others; who by common law have ever been held
(as far as our books can shew us) to have been corporations, _virtute
officii_: and this incorporation is so inseparably annexed to their
offices, that we cannot frame a complete legal idea of any of these
persons, but we must also have an idea of a corporation, capable to
transmit his rights to his successors, at the same time. Another
method of implication, whereby the king's consent is presumed, is as
to all corporations by _prescription_, such as the city of London, and
many others[h], which have existed as corporations, time whereof the
memory of man runneth not to the contrary; and therefore are looked
upon in law to be well created. For though the members thereof can
shew no legal charter of incorporation, yet in cases of such high
antiquity the law presumes there once was one; and that by the variety
of accidents, which a length of time may produce, the charter is lost
or destroyed. The methods, by which the king's consent is expressly
given, are either by act of parliament or charter. By act of
parliament, of which the royal assent is a necessary ingredient,
corporations may undoubtedly be created[i]: but it is observable, that
most of those statutes, which are usually cited as having created
corporations, do either confirm such as have been before created by
the king; as in the case of the college of physicians, erected by
charter 10 Hen. VIII[k], which charter was afterwards confirmed in
parliament[l]; or, they permit the king to erect a corporation _in
futuro_ with such and such powers; as is the case of the bank of
England[m], and the society of the British fishery[n]. So that the
immediate creative act is usually performed by the king alone, in
virtue of his royal prerogative[o].

[Footnote h: 2 Inst. 330.]

[Footnote i: 10 Rep. 29. 1 Roll. Abr. 512. [Transcriber's Note:
footnote marker missing in original.]]

[Footnote k: 8 Rep. 114.]

[Footnote l: 14 & 15 Hen. VIII. c. 5.]

[Footnote m: Stat. 5 & 6 W. & M. c. 20.]

[Footnote n: Stat. 23 Geo. II. c. 4.]

[Footnote o: See page 263.]

ALL the other methods therefore whereby corporations exist, by common
law, by prescription, and by act of parliament, are for the most part
reducible to this of the king's letters patent, or charter of
incorporation. The king's creation may be performed by the words
"_creamus, erigimus, fundamus, incorporamus_," or the like. Nay it is
held, that if the king grants to a set of men to have _gildam
mercatoriam_, a mercantile meeting or assembly[p], this is alone
sufficient to incorporate and establish them for ever[q].

[Footnote p: _Gild_ signified among the Saxons a fraternity, derived
from the verb [Anglo-Saxon: gildan] to pay, because every man paid his
share towards the expenses of the community. And hence their place of
meeting is frequently called the _Gild-hall_.]

[Footnote q: 10 Rep. 30. 1 Roll. Abr. 513.]

THE parliament, we observed, by it's absolute and transcendent
authority, may perform this, or any other act whatsoever: and actually
did perform it to a great extent, by statute 39 Eliz. c. 5. which
incorporated all hospitals and houses of correction founded by
charitable persons, without farther trouble: and the same has been
done in other cases of charitable foundations. But otherwise it is not
usual thus to intrench upon the prerogative of the crown, and the king
may prevent it when he pleases. And, in the particular instance
before-mentioned, it was done, as sir Edward Coke observes[r], to
avoid the charges of incorporation and licences of mortmain in small
benefactions; which in his days were grown so great, that it
discouraged many men to undertake these pious and charitable works.

[Footnote r: 2 Inst. 722.]

THE king may grant to a subject the power of erecting corporations[s],
though the contrary was formerly held[t]: that is, he may permit the
subject to name the persons and powers of the corporation at his
pleasure; but it is really the king that erects, and the subject is
but the instrument: for though none but the king can make a
corporation, yet _qui facit per alium, facit per se_[v]. In this
manner the chancellor of the university of Oxford has power by charter
to erect corporations; and has actually often exerted it, in the
erection of several matriculated companies, now subsisting, of
tradesmen subservient to the students.

[Footnote s: Bro. _Abr. tit. Prerog._ 53. Viner. _Prerog._ 88. pl.
16.]

[Footnote t: Yearbook, 2 Hen. VII. 13.]

[Footnote v: 10 Rep. 33.]

WHEN a corporation is erected, a name must be given it; and by that
name alone it must sue, and be sued, and do all legal acts; though a
very minute variation therein is not material[u]. Such name is the
very being of it's constitution; and, though it is the will of the
king that erects the corporation, yet the name is the knot of it's
combination, without which it could not perform it's corporate
functions[w]. The name of incorporation, says sir Edward Coke, is as
a proper name, or name of baptism; and therefore when a private
founder gives his college or hospital a name, he does it only as
godfather; and by that same name the king baptizes the incorporation[x].

[Footnote u: 10 Rep. 122. [Transcriber's Note: Footnotes v and u are
in this order in the original.]]

[Footnote w: Gilb. Hist. C.P. 182.]

[Footnote x: 10 Rep. 28.]

II. AFTER a corporation is so formed and named, it acquires many
powers, rights, capacities, and incapacities, which we are next to
consider. Some of these are necessarily and inseparably incident to
every corporation; which incidents, as soon as a corporation is duly
erected, are tacitly annexed of course[y]. As, 1. To have perpetual
succession. This is the very end of it's incorporation: for there
cannot be a succession for ever without an incorporation[z]; and
therefore all aggregate corporations have a power necessarily implied
of electing members in the room of such as go off[a]. 2. To sue or be
sued, implead or be impleaded, grant or receive, by it's corporate
name, and do all other acts as natural persons may. 3. To purchase
lands, and hold them, for the benefit of themselves and their
successors: which two are consequential to the former. 4. To have a
common seal. For a corporation, being an invisible body, cannot
manifest it's intentions by any personal act or oral discourse: it
therefore acts and speaks only by it's common seal. For, though the
particular members may express their private consents to any act, by
words, or signing their names, yet this does not bind the corporation:
it is the fixing of the seal, and that only, which unites the several
assents of the individuals, who compose the community, and makes one
joint assent of the whole[b]. 5. To make by-laws or private statutes
for the better government of the corporation; which are binding upon
themselves, unless contrary to the laws of the land, and then they are
void. This is also included by law in the very act of incorporation[c]:
for, as natural reason is given to the natural body for the governing
it, so by-laws or statutes are a sort of political reason to govern
the body politic. And this right of making by-laws for their own
government, not contrary to the law of the land, was allowed by the
law of the twelve tables at Rome[d]. But no trading company is, with
us, allowed to make by-laws, which may affect the king's prerogative,
or the common profit of the people, unless they be approved by the
chancellor, treasurer, and chief justices, or the judges of assise in
their circuits[e]. These five powers are inseparably incident to every
corporation, at least to every corporation _aggregate_: for two of
them, though they may be practised, yet are very unnecessary to a
corporation _sole_; viz. to have a corporate seal to testify his sole
assent, and to make statutes for the regulation of his own conduct.

[Footnote y: 10 Rep. 30. Hob. 211.]

[Footnote z: 10 Rep. 26.]

[Footnote a: 1 Roll. Abr. 514.]

[Footnote b: Dav. 44. 48.]

[Footnote c: Hob. 211.]

[Footnote d: _Sodales legem quam volent, dum ne quid ex publica lege
corrumpant, sibi ferunto._]

[Footnote e: Stat. 19 Hen. VII. c. 7.]

THERE are also certain privileges and disabilities that attend an
aggregate corporation, and are not applicable to such as are sole; the
reason of them ceasing, and of course the law. It must always appear
by attorney; for it cannot appear in person, being, as sir Edward Coke
says[f], invisible, and existing only in intendment and consideration
of law. It can neither maintain, or be made defendant to, an action of
battery or such like personal injuries; for a corporation can neither
beat, nor be beaten, in it's body politic[g]. A corporation cannot
commit treason, or felony, or other crime, in it's corporate
capacity[h]: though it's members may, in their distinct individual
capacities. Neither is it capable of suffering a traitor's, or felon's
punishment, for it is not liable to corporal penalties, nor to
attainder, forfeiture, or corruption of blood[i]. It cannot be
executor or administrator, or perform any personal duties; for it
cannot take an oath for the due execution of the office. It cannot be
a trustee; for such kind of confidence is foreign to the ends of it's
institution: neither can it be compelled to perform such trust,
because it cannot be committed to prison[k]; for it's existence being
ideal, no man can apprehend or arrest it. And therefore also it cannot
be outlawed; for outlawry always supposes a precedent right of
arresting, which has been defeated by the parties absconding, and that
also a corporation cannot do: for which reasons the proceedings to
compel a corporation to appear to any suit by attorney are always by
distress on their lands and goods[l]. Neither can a corporation be
excommunicated; for it has no soul, as is gravely observed by sir
Edward Coke[m]: and therefore also it is not liable to be summoned
into the ecclesiastical courts upon any account; for those courts act
only _pro salute animae_, and their sentences can only be inforced by
spiritual censures: a consideration, which, carried to it's full
extent, would alone demonstrate the impropriety of these courts
interfering in any temporal rights whatsoever.

[Footnote f: 10 Rep. 32.]

[Footnote g: Bro. _Abr. tit. Corporation._ 63.]

[Footnote h: 10 Rep. 32.]

[Footnote i: The civil law also ordains that, in any misbehaviour of a
body corporate, the directors only shall be answerable in their
personal capacity, and not the corporation. _Ff._ 4. 3. 15.]

[Footnote k: Plowd. 538.]

[Footnote l: Bro. _Abr. tit. Corporation._ 11. _Outlawry._ 72.]

[Footnote m: 10 Rep. 32.]

THERE are also other incidents and powers, which belong to some sort
of corporations, and not to others. An aggregate corporation may take
goods and chattels for the benefit of themselves and their successors,
but a sole corporation cannot[n]: for such moveable property is liable
to be lost or imbezzled, and would raise a multitude of disputes
between the successor and executor; which the law is careful to avoid.
In ecclesiastical and eleemosynary foundations, the king or the
founder may give them rules, laws, statutes, and ordinances, which
they are bound to observe: but corporations merely lay, constituted
for civil purposes, are subject to no particular statutes; but to the
common law, and to their own by-laws, not contrary to the laws of the
realm[o]. Aggregate corporations also, that have by their constitution
a head, as a dean, warden, master, or the like, cannot do any acts
during the vacancy of the headship, except only appointing another:
neither are they then capable of receiving a grant; for such
corporation is incomplete without a head[p]. But there may be a
corporation aggregate constituted without a head[q]: as the
collegiate church of Southwell in Nottinghamshire, which consists only
of prebendaries; and the governors of the Charter-house, London, who
have no president or superior, but are all of equal authority. In
aggregate corporations also, the act of the major part is esteemed the
act of the whole[r]. By the civil law this major part must have
consisted of two thirds of the whole; else no act could be
performed[s]: which perhaps may be one reason why they required three
at least to make a corporation. But, with us, _any_ majority is
sufficient to determine the act of the whole body. And whereas,
notwithstanding the law stood thus, some founders of corporations had
made statutes in derogation of the common law, making very frequently
the unanimous assent of the society to be necessary to any corporate
act; (which king Henry VIII found to be a great obstruction to his
projected scheme of obtaining a surrender of the lands of
ecclesiastical corporations) it was therefore enacted by statute 33
Hen. VIII. c. 27. that all private statutes shall be utterly void,
whereby any grant or election, made by the head, with the concurrence
of the major part of the body, is liable to be obstructed by any one
or more, being the minority: but this statute extends not to any
negative or necessary voice, given by the founder to the head of any
such society.

[Footnote n: Co. Litt. 46.]

[Footnote o: Lord Raym. 8.]

[Footnote p: Co. Litt. 263, 264.]

[Footnote q: 10 Rep. 30.]

[Footnote r: Bro. _Abr. tit. Corporation._ 31, 34.]

[Footnote s: _Ff._ 3. 4. 3.]

WE before observed that it was incident to every corporation, to have
a capacity to purchase lands for themselves and successors: and this
is regularly true at the common law[t]. But they are excepted out of
the statute of wills[u]; so that no devise of lands to a corporation
by will is good: except for charitable uses, by statute 43 Eliz. c.
4[w]. And also, by a great variety of statutes[x], their privilege
even of purchasing from any living grantor is greatly abridged; so
that now a corporation, either ecclesiastical or lay, must have a
licence from the king to purchase[y], before they can exert that
capacity which is vested in them by the common law: nor is even this
in all cases sufficient. These statutes are generally called the
statutes of _mortmain_; all purchases made by corporate bodies being
said to be purchases in mortmain, _in mortua manu_: for the reason of
which appellation sir Edward Coke[z] offers many conjectures; but
there is one which seems more probable than any that he has given us:
viz. that these purchases being usually made by ecclesiastical bodies,
the members of which (being professed) were reckoned dead persons in
law, land therefore, holden by them, might with great propriety be
said to be held _in mortua manu_.

[Footnote t: 10 Rep. 30.]

[Footnote u: 34 Hen. VIII. c. 5.]

[Footnote w: Hob. 136.]

[Footnote x: From _magna carta_, 9 Hen. III. c. 36. to 9 Geo. II. c.
36.]

[Footnote y: By the civil law a corporation was incapable of taking
lands, unless by special privilege from the emperor: _collegium, si
nullo speciali privilegio subnixum fit, haereditatem capere non posse,
dubium non est_. _Cod._ 6. 24. 8.]

[Footnote z: 1 Inst. 2.]

I SHALL defer the more particular exposition of these statutes of
mortmain, till the next book of these commentaries, when we shall
consider the nature and tenures of estates; and also the exposition of
those disabling statutes of queen Elizabeth, which restrain spiritual
and eleemosynary corporations from aliening such lands as they are
present in legal possession of: only mentioning them in this place,
for the sake of regularity, as statutable incapacities incident and
relative to corporations.

THE general _duties_ of all bodies politic, considered in their
corporate capacity, may, like those of natural persons, be reduced to
this single one; that of acting up to the end or design, whatever it
be, for which they were created by their founder.

III. I PROCEED therefore next to enquire, how these corporations may
be _visited_. For corporations being composed of individuals, subject
to human frailties, are liable, as well as private persons, to deviate
from the end of their institution. And for that reason the law has
provided proper persons to visit, enquire into, and correct all
irregularities that arise in such corporations, either sole or
aggregate, and whether ecclesiastical, civil, or eleemosynary. With
regard to all ecclesiastical corporations, the ordinary is their
visitor, so constituted by the canon law, and from thence derived to
us. The pope formerly, and now the king, as supreme ordinary, is the
visitor of the arch-bishop or metropolitan; the metropolitan has the
charge and coercion of all his suffragan bishops; and the bishops in
their several dioceses are the visitors of all deans and chapters, of
all parsons and vicars, and of all other spiritual corporations. With
respect to all lay corporations, the founder, his heirs, or assigns,
are the visitors, whether the foundation be civil or eleemosynary; for
in a lay incorporation the ordinary neither can nor ought to visit[a].

[Footnote a: 10 Rep. 31.]

I KNOW it is generally said, that civil corporations are subject to no
visitation, but merely to the common law of the land; and this shall
be presently explained. But first, as I have laid it down as a rule
that the founder, his heirs, or assigns, are the visitors of all
lay-corporations, let us enquire what is meant by the _founder_. The
founder of all corporations in the strictest and original sense is the
king alone, for he only can incorporate a society: and in civil
incorporations, such as mayor and commonalty, &c, where there are no
possessions or endowments given to the body, there is no other founder
but the king: but in eleemosynary foundations, such as colleges and
hospitals, where there is an endowment of lands, the law
distinguishes, and makes two species of foundation; the one _fundatio
incipiens_, or the incorporation, in which sense the king is the
general founder of all colleges and hospitals; the other _fundatio
perficiens_, or the dotation of it, in which sense the first gift of
the revenues is the foundation, and he who gives them is in law the
founder: and it is in this last sense that we generally call a man the
founder of a college or hospital[b]. But here the king has his
prerogative: for, if the king and a private man join in endowing an
eleemosynary foundation, the king alone shall be the founder of it.
And, in general, the king being the sole founder of all civil
corporations, and the endower the perficient founder of all
eleemosynary ones, the right of visitation of the former results,
according to the rule laid down, to the king; and of the latter, to
the patron or endower.

[Footnote b: 10 Rep. 33.]

THE king being thus constituted by law the visitor of all civil
corporations, the law has also appointed the place, wherein he shall
exercise this jurisdiction: which is the court of king's bench; where,
and where only, all misbehaviours of this kind of corporations are
enquired into and redressed, and all their controversies decided. And
this is what I understand to be the meaning of our lawyers, when they
say that these civil corporations are liable to no visitation; that
is, that the law having by immemorial usage appointed them to be
visited and inspected by the king their founder, in his majesty's
court of king's bench, according to the rules of the common law, they
ought not to be visited elsewhere, or by any other authority. And this
is so strictly true, that though the king by his letters patent had
subjected the college of physicians to the visitation of four very
respectable persons, the lord chancellor, the two chief justices, and
the chief baron; though the college had accepted this charter with all
possible marks of acquiescence, and had acted under it for near a
century; yet, in 1753, the authority of this provision coming in
dispute, on an appeal preferred to these supposed visitors, they
directed the legality of their own appointment to be argued: and, as
this college was a mere civil, and not an eleemosynary foundation,
they at length determined, upon several days solemn debate, that they
had no jurisdiction as visitors; and remitted the appellant (if
aggrieved) to his regular remedy in his majesty's court of king's
bench.

AS to eleemosynary corporations, by the dotation the founder and his
heirs are of common right the legal visitors, to see that that
property is rightly employed, which would otherwise have descended to
the visitor himself: but, if the founder has appointed and assigned
any other person to be visitor, then his assignee so appointed is
invested with all the founder's power, in exclusion of his heir.
Eleemosynary corporations are chiefly hospitals, or colleges in the
university. These were all of them considered by the popish clergy, as
of mere ecclesiastical jurisdiction: however, the law of the land
judged otherwise; and, with regard to hospitals, it has long been
held[c], that if the hospital be spiritual, the bishop shall visit;
but if lay, the patron. This right of lay patrons was indeed abridged
by statute 2 Hen. V. c. 1. which ordained, that the ordinary should
visit _all_ hospitals founded by subjects; though the king's right was
reserved, to visit by his commissioners such as were of royal
foundation. But the subject's right was in part restored by statute 14
Eliz. c. 5. which directs the bishop to visit such hospitals only,
where no visitor is appointed by the founders thereof: and all the
hospitals founded by virtue of the statute 39 Eliz. c. 5. are to be
visited by such persons as shall be nominated by the respective
founders. But still, if the founder appoints nobody, the bishop of the
diocese must visit[d].

[Footnote c: Yearbook, 8 Edw. III. 28. 8 Aff. 29.]

[Footnote d: 2 Inst. 725.]

COLLEGES in the universities (whatever the common law may now, or
might formerly, judge) were certainly considered by the popish clergy,
under whose direction they were, as _ecclesiastical_, or at least as
_clerical_, corporations; and therefore the right of visitation was
claimed by the ordinary of the diocese. This is evident, because in
many of our most ancient colleges, where the founder had a mind to
subject them to a visitor of his own nomination, he obtained for that
purpose a papal bulle to exempt them from the jurisdiction of the
ordinary; several of which are still preserved in the archives of the
respective societies. And I have reason to believe, that in one of our
colleges, (wherein the bishop of that diocese, in which Oxford was
formerly comprized, has immemorially exercised visitatorial authority)
there is no special visitor appointed by the college statutes: so that
the bishop's interposition can be ascribed to nothing else, but his
supposed title as ordinary to visit this, among other ecclesiastical
foundations. And it is not impossible, that the number of colleges in
Cambridge, which are visited by the bishop of Ely, may in part be
derived from the same original.

BUT, whatever might be formerly the opinion of the clergy, it is now
held as established common law, that colleges are lay-corporations,
though sometimes totally composed of ecclesiastical persons; and that
the right of visitation does not arise from any principles of the
canon law, but of necessity was created by the common law[e]. And yet
the power and jurisdiction of visitors in colleges was left so much in
the dark at common law, that the whole doctrine was very unsettled
till king William's time; in the sixth year of whose reign, the famous
case of _Philips and Bury_ happened[f]. In this the main question was,
whether the sentence of the bishop of Exeter, who (as visitor) had
deprived doctor Bury the rector of Exeter college, could be examined
and redressed by the court of king's bench. And the three puisne
judges were of opinion, that it might be reviewed, for that the
visitor's jurisdiction could not exclude the common law; and
accordingly judgment was given in that court. But the lord chief
justice, Holt, was of a contrary opinion; and held, that by the common
law the office of visitor is to judge according to the statutes of the
college, and to expel and deprive upon just occasions, and to hear all
appeals of course; and that from him, and him only, the party grieved
ought to have redress; the founder having reposed in him so entire a
confidence, that he will administer justice impartially, that his
determinations are final, and examinable in no other court whatsoever.
And, upon this, a writ of error being brought in the house of lords,
they reversed the judgment of the court of king's bench, and concurred
in sir John Holt's opinion. And to this leading case all subsequent
determinations have been conformable. But, where the visitor is under
a temporary disability, there the court of king's bench will
interpose, to prevent a defect of justice. Thus the bishop of Chester
is visitor of Manchester college: but, happening also to be warden,
the court held that his power was suspended during the union of those
offices; and therefore issued a peremptory _mandamus_ to him, as
warden, to admit a person intitled to a chaplainship[g]. Also it is
said[h], that if a founder of an eleemosynary foundation appoints a
visitor, and limits his jurisdiction by rules and statutes, if the
visitor in his sentence exceeds those rules, an action lies against
him; but it is otherwise, where he mistakes in a thing within his
power.

[Footnote e: Lord Raym. 8.]

[Footnote f: Lord Raym. 5. 4 Mod. 106. Shower. 35. Skinn. 407. Salk.
403. Carthew. 180.]

[Footnote g: Stra. 797.]

[Footnote h: 2 Lutw. 1566.]

IV. WE come now, in the last place, to consider how corporations may
be dissolved. Any particular member may be disfranchised, or lose his
place in the corporation, by acting contrary to the laws of the
society, or the laws of the land; or he may resign it by his own
voluntary act[i]. But the body politic may also itself be dissolved in
several ways; which dissolution is the civil death of the corporation:
and in this case their lands and tenements shall revert to the person,
or his heirs, who granted them to the corporation; for the law doth
annex a condition to every such grant, that if the corporation be
dissolved, the grantor shall have the lands again, because the cause
of the grant faileth[k]. The grant is indeed only during the life of
the corporation; which _may_ endure for ever: but, when that life is
determined by the dissolution of the body politic, the grantor takes
it back by reversion, as in the case of every other grant for life.
And hence it appears how injurious, as well to private as public
rights, those statutes were, which vested in king Henry VIII, instead
of the heirs of the founder, the lands of the dissolved monasteries.
The debts of a corporation, either to or from it, are totally
extinguished by it's dissolution; so that the members thereof cannot
recover, or be charged with them, in their natural capacities[l]:
agreeable to that maxim of the civil law[m], "_si quid universitati
debetur, singulis non debetur; nec, quod debet universitas, singuli
debent_."

[Footnote i: 11 Rep. 98.]

[Footnote k: Co. Litt. 13.]

[Footnote l: 1 Lev. 237.]

[Footnote m: _Ff._ 3. 4. 7.]

A CORPORATION may be dissolved, 1. By act of parliament, which is
boundless in it's operations; 2. By the natural death of all it's
members, in case of an aggregate corporation; 3. By surrender of it's
franchises into the hands of the king, which is a kind of suicide; 4.
By forfeiture of it's charter, through negligence or abuse of it's
franchises; in which case the law judges that the body politic has
broken the condition upon which it was incorporated, and thereupon the
incorporation is void. And the regular course is to bring a writ of
_quo warranto_, to enquire by what warrant the members now exercise
their corporate power, having forfeited it by such and such
proceedings. The exertion of this act of law, for the purposes of the
state, in the reigns of king Charles and king James the second,
particularly by seising the charter of the city of London, gave great
and just offence; though perhaps, in strictness of law, the
proceedings were sufficiently regular: but now[n] it is enacted, that
the charter of the city of London shall never more be forfeited for
any cause whatsoever. And, because by the common law corporations were
dissolved, in case the mayor or head officer was not duly elected on
the day appointed in the charter or established by prescription, it is
now provided[o], that for the future no corporation shall be dissolved
upon that account; and ample directions are given for appointing a new
officer, in case there be no election, or a void one, made upon the
charter or prescriptive day.

[Footnote n: Stat. 2 W. & M. c. 8.]

[Footnote o: Stat. 11 Geo. I. c. 4.]


THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Commentaries on the Laws of England, by 
William Blackstone

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMMENTARIES--LAWS ENGLAND--BOOK 1 ***

***** This file should be named 30802-8.txt or 30802-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/8/0/30802/

Produced by The Bookworm, Linda Cantoni, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Posner Memorial Collection
(http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
